0. Herodotus of Halicarnassus wrote this account to ensure that the remarkable achievements of both Greeks and non-Greeks are not lost to time. He sought to preserve the glory of their great and wondrous deeds, including the reasons behind their wars with each other. 
1. According to Persian scholars, the Phoenicians were responsible for the conflict. They arrived in our seas from the Red Sea and settled in the land they still inhabit today, immediately embarking on long voyages. They transported goods from Egypt and Assyria to various locations, including Argos, which was then the most prominent city among the people of what is now known as Greece. Upon arriving in Argos, the Phoenicians unloaded their cargo. Five or six days later, when most of their merchandise had been sold, a group of women, including the daughter of the king named Io (as both Persians and Greeks agree), arrived at the shore. While the women were bargaining for the goods they desired at the back of the ship, the Phoenicians encouraged each other to attack them. Although many of the women managed to flee, Io and several others were captured and taken aboard the ship, which then departed for Egypt. 
2. According to the Persians, Io's arrival in Egypt was not a voluntary one, unlike what the Greeks believe. They consider this to be the first act of wrongdoing. Next in their account, the Persians claim that some Greeks (although they are unsure of their identity) arrived at Tyre in Phoenicia and abducted the king's daughter, Europa. It is assumed that these Greeks were Cretans. Up until this point, both sides had committed an equal number of wrongs. However, according to their account, the Greeks were responsible for the second act of wrongdoing. The Greeks then sailed in a long ship to Aea, a city of the Colchians, and to the river Phasis. Once they had completed their mission, they abducted the king's daughter, Medea. When the Colchian king sent a messenger to demand compensation for the theft of his daughter and her safe return, the Greeks refused. They argued that since they had not received any compensation for the abduction of Io from Argos, they would not provide any to the Colchians. 
3. According to legend, in the next generation, Alexandrus, the son of Priam, heard this story and became determined to capture a wife from Hellas. He was convinced that he could do so without facing any consequences. And so, he abducted Helen. And so, he took Helen with him. The Greeks initially decided to send messengers to demand the return of Helen and seek compensation for her capture. However, the Trojans countered by pointing out the Greeks' own history of seeking reparations and not returning seized goods when asked. They also brought up the case of Medea, who had been taken by the Greeks. 
4. Up until this point, both sides had only been seizing each other's property. However, according to the Persians, the Greeks were at fault for invading Asia before the Persians had even attacked Europe. They claim that it is unfair to abduct women. However, they believe that seeking revenge for rape is foolish, as wise individuals do not concern themselves with such matters. They argue that the women would not have been taken if they had not desired it themselves. The people of Asia did not bother to acknowledge the taking of their women, but the Greeks, motivated by the abduction of a Lacedaemonian woman, assembled a massive fleet, sailed to Asia, and dismantled the power of Priam. Since then, the Persians have considered the Greeks to be their adversaries. The Persians assert that Asia and its foreign inhabitants belong to them, while they view Europe and the Greek people as distinct from themselves. 
5. According to the Persians, the fall of Troy marked the beginning of their animosity towards the Greeks. However, the Phoenicians have a different tale to tell about Io than the Persians. They claim that they did not abduct her to Egypt against her will. She had sexual relations with the ship's captain while in Argos. After discovering she was pregnant, she felt ashamed to let her parents know and decided to leave on her own accord with the Phoenicians to avoid being discovered. These are the accounts as told by the Persians and the Phoenicians. As for me, I won't claim the veracity of any particular story. Instead, I'll focus on identifying those who committed unjust acts against the Greeks, and continue with my historical account, covering both small and great cities alike. Many states that were once powerful have now diminished in size, while those that were small during my time have grown in greatness. Since I understand that human prosperity is never constant in one place, I will discuss both types of cities. 
6. Croesus, born in Lydia and son of Alyattes, ruled over all the nations to the west of the Halys River. This river flows from the south between Syria and Paphlagonia and eventually empties into the Euxine Sea. Croesus was the first foreigner on record to conquer and demand tribute from certain Greek groups, while also earning the loyalty of others. Specifically, he subjugated the Ionians, Aeolians, and Dorians of Asia, but gained the friendship of the Lacedaemonians. Prior to Croesus' reign, all Greeks enjoyed freedom. This was because the Cimmerian army that had invaded Ionia before his time did not conquer the cities, but instead pillaged and looted them. 
7. The Mermnadae family, also known as the descendants of Croesus, inherited the ruling power that once belonged to the descendants of Heracles. This transfer of power occurred in the following manner. The ruler of Sardis during this time was Candaules, also known as Myrsilus to the Greeks. He was a descendant of Alcaeus, who was the son of Heracles. The first Heraclid king of Sardis was Agron, who was the son of Ninus, son of Belus, son of Alcaeus. Candaules, son of Myrsus, was the last Heraclid king of Sardis. Before Agron, the kings of this country were descendants of Lydus, who was the son of Atys. The Lydian district was named after Lydus. Prior to that, it was known as the land of the Meii. The Heraclidae, who were descendants of Heracles and a female slave of Iardanus, received the ruling power from the previous kings due to an oracle. They held this power for five hundred and five years, which spanned over twenty-two generations. The power was passed down from father to son until it reached Candaules, son of Myrsus. 
8. Candaules was deeply in love with his wife and considered her to be the most beautiful woman in the world. He would often praise her beauty to Gyges, his most trusted bodyguard, who he confided in with all his secrets. Eventually, Candaules spoke to Gyges and expressed his doubts about whether Gyges truly believed in the beauty of his wife. He believed that seeing her naked would convince Gyges, as men tend to trust their eyes more than their ears. Gyges vehemently protested against Candaules' suggestion. He addressed Candaules as "Master" and expressed his disapproval of the idea, stating that it was inappropriate for him to see his mistress naked. He believed that a woman's modesty disappears along with her clothes. He reminded Candaules that wise rules have been established by men, and one of them is to mind one's own business. He assured Candaules that he believed his queen to be the most beautiful woman in the world. He respectfully requested that Candaules not ask him to do something that was against the law. 
9. Gyges resisted, fearing that something bad might happen to him. Candaules reassured Gyges, saying, "Be brave! Don't worry about me testing you or my wife harming you." "I'll make sure she never finds out that you saw her," Candaules promised. "I'll take you to our bedroom and hide you behind the open door. Once I'm in bed, my wife will join me," Candaules explained. "There's a chair by the door where she'll place each piece of clothing as she takes it off, and you can watch her as much as you want," Candaules revealed. "Once she moves from the chair to the bed, make sure she doesn't see you leaving through the doorway," Candaules warned. 
10. Gyges, unable to flee, reluctantly agreed to Candaules' request. When Candaules deemed it was time to retire for the night, he led Gyges into the chamber. Shortly after, his wife entered and began undressing. Gyges caught a glimpse of her as she turned her back to him and headed towards the bed. Seizing the opportunity, he quietly slipped out of the room. As Gyges made his escape, the woman caught a glimpse of him and realized what her husband had orchestrated. Despite feeling humiliated, she chose not to reveal that she had witnessed Gyges' departure. Instead, she decided to teach her husband a lesson, as it was considered a grave disgrace among the Lydians and many other cultures to be seen unclothed. 
11. She remained silent and gave no indication of her thoughts for the time being. At daybreak, she gathered her most loyal household members and summoned Gyges, who was accustomed to attending to her needs. Assuming that the queen was unaware of recent events, Gyges responded to her call, as he was accustomed to being at her beck and call. Upon Gyges' arrival, the lady spoke to him directly, presenting him with two options and urging him to make a decision. She gave Gyges an ultimatum: either he must kill Candaules and claim her and the throne of Lydia as his own, or he would be killed immediately, preventing him from ever again obeying Candaules' orders or witnessing anything he shouldn't. She made it clear that one of them had to die - either Candaules, who had devised this scheme, or Gyges, who had broken the custom by seeing her uncovered. Gyges was taken aback by the proposition and stood there in shock for a moment. He then pleaded with her not to force him into making such a difficult decision. Despite his efforts to dissuade her, Gyges realized that he had no other choice but to act. He knew that he either had to kill his master or be killed by others, so he made the difficult decision to take matters into his own hands and save his own life. Gyges then inquired about the logistics of the plan, stating that since he was being compelled to kill his master against his will, he needed to know how they were going to carry out the deed. The lady responded by revealing the plan: Gyges would approach Candaules while he was asleep, just as he had made Gyges see her naked, and attack him. 
12. After devising their plan and waiting for nightfall, Gyges trailed the woman into the chamber. He had no hope of escape, and it was clear that either he or Candaules would meet their demise. The woman handed him a dagger and concealed him behind the door. Gyges emerged from his hiding spot and killed Candaules in his sleep, thus seizing both the queen and the throne. Archilochus of Parus, a contemporary of Gyges, immortalized him in his iambic verses. The woman provided Gyges with a dagger and concealed him behind the door. When the moment was right, he crept out and swiftly ended Candaules' life as he slumbered. In this way, Gyges became the ruler of both the queen and the kingdom. Archilochus of Parus, who lived during the same era, referenced Gyges in his iambic verses. 
13. Gyges seized control of the kingdom and the Delphic oracle confirmed his reign. When the Lydians rebelled against the treatment of Candaules and took up arms, Gyges' supporters made a deal with the rest of the people. They agreed that if the oracle declared Gyges the rightful king of the Lydians, he would rule. But if not, he would relinquish the throne to the Heraclidae. The oracle indeed declared Gyges the king, and he ascended to the throne. But the Pythian priestess warned that the Heraclidae would seek revenge on Gyges' descendants in the fifth generation. The Lydians and their rulers ignored this prophecy until it came to pass. 
14. The Mermnadae seized the throne from the Heraclidae and claimed it as their own. After acquiring the throne, Gyges sent numerous offerings to Delphi. Among them were many silver offerings and a hoard of gold, including six remarkable golden bowls. These bowls weigh thirty talents and are currently housed in the treasury of the Corinthians. However, it should be noted that this treasury actually belongs to Cypselus, son of Eetion, and not to the people of Corinth. Gyges was the first known foreigner to make offerings at Delphi after Midas, the king of Phrygia and son of Gordias. Midas also made an offering, which was his royal seat used for giving judgments. This seat is truly remarkable. This seat is located in the same area as Gyges' golden bowls. The Delphians refer to the gold and silver offerings made by Gyges as "Gygian" in honor of the dedicator. 
15. Upon ascending the throne, Gyges followed the footsteps of his predecessors and marched his army into the territories of Miletus and Smyrna. He successfully captured the city of Colophon. However, since Gyges did not achieve any other notable accomplishments during his thirty-eight-year reign, I will not dwell on him any further. Instead, I will shift my focus to his successor, Ardys, who was his son. Ardys, following in his father's footsteps, conquered Priene and launched an invasion into the territory of Miletus. During his reign as the monarch of Sardis, the Cimmerians, who had been displaced by the nomadic Scythians, migrated into Asia and seized control of Sardis, with the exception of the acropolis. 
16. Ardys ruled for almost half a century before his son Sadyattes took over for twelve years. Following Sadyattes, Alyattes ascended to the throne and launched a war against the Medes, led by Deioces' descendant Cyaxares. He also expelled the Cimmerians from Asia, captured Smyrna (a colony of Colophon), and invaded the territories of Clazomenae. However, his return from these campaigns was not as triumphant as he had hoped, as he suffered a great defeat. These were the most notable events of his reign. Unfortunately, his return from these campaigns was far from what he had hoped for, as he suffered a great disaster. These were the most noteworthy accomplishments of his reign, but he also achieved other notable deeds during his time as ruler. 
