1. After the capture of Babylon, Darius' campaign against the Scythians took place: for with Asia flourishing with men and great wealth coming together, Darius desired to take vengeance on the Scythians, because they had first invaded the Median land and, having won the battle against those who opposed them, had been the cause of injustice. For the Scythians ruled over the upper part of Asia, as has been mentioned by me earlier, for twenty-eight years lacking two. For, pursuing the Cimmerians, they invaded Asia and put an end to the rule of the Medes: for these ruled over Asia before the arrival of the Scythians. But the Scythians, having been away for twenty-eight years and returning after such a long time to their own land, were met with no less trouble than the Median one: for they found a not insignificant army opposing them. For the wives of the Scythians, as their husbands had been away for a long time, had been consorting with the slaves.
2. The Scythians blind all their slaves for the sake of the milk they drink, making it in this way. When they take bone tubes, most suitable for flutes, they insert these into the joints of the mares' teats and blow with their mouths, while others, blowing, milk them. They say they do this for this reason: to fill the mare's veins with air and to let the udder down. And when they have milked the milk, having poured it into hollow wooden vessels and having placed the blind slaves around the vessels, they shake the milk, and the part that settles on top they skim off, considering it to be more valuable, while the part that settles below is less valuable than the other. For this reason, the Scythians blind all those they capture. For they are not farmers but nomads.
3. From these slaves and women, then, a younger generation was raised for them. When they learned of their own origin, they opposed the Scythians coming from the Medes. And first, they cut off the land, digging a wide trench extending from the Tauric mountains to the Maeetian lake, which is the largest. Then, having tried to invade, they fought against the Scythians who were encamped. Many battles took place, and they were unable to gain any advantage over the Scythians in the fight. One of them said these words, "What are we doing, fellow Scythians? We are fighting our own slaves, and by killing them, we become fewer, and by killing us, they become fewer, and we will rule over the rest. Now, it seems to me that we should leave our spears and bows, and each of us should take the whip from our horse and go closer to them. For as long as they saw us holding weapons, they thought they were like us and from the same stock as us. But when they see us holding whips instead of weapons, they will learn that they are our slaves and will recognize this. They will not endure it."
4. Hearing these things, the Scythians acted accordingly: and those who were struck with amazement by what was happening, forgot about the battle and fled. Thus, the Scythians once ruled over Asia and, having been driven out again by the Medes, returned to their own land in such a manner. For these reasons, Darius, wanting to exact revenge, gathered an army against them.
5. Thus, the Scythians say that their nation is the youngest of all, and that it came to be in this way: a man named Targitaüs was born in this land, which was then a desolate wilderness; and they say that the parents of this Targitaüs were, though I myself do not believe it, Zeus and a daughter of the Borysthenes river. Now, Targitaüs had three sons, Lipoxaïs, Arpoxaïs, and the youngest, Colaxaïs. During their rule, golden objects - a plough, a yoke, a sword, and a flask - were carried from the sky and fell into Scythia. The eldest son saw them first and went near, wanting to take them, but the gold began to burn as he approached. When he withdrew, the second son approached, and the same thing happened to him as well. The gold, indeed, drove them away by burning, but when the youngest, the third, approached, the fire went out, and he took the gold to his own house. And the older brothers, acknowledging this, handed over the entire kingdom to the youngest.
6. From indeed Lipoxaïs, these Scythians were born, who are called the Auchatae clan; from the middle one, Arpoxaïs, those who are called Katiari and Traspians; and from the youngest of them, the king, those who are called Paralatae. To all of them, the name is Skoloti, named after the king. The Greeks named them Scythians.
7. Now, the Scythians say that they came into being in this way, and they count the years since their whole race came into being, from the first king Targitaüs to the crossing of Darius against them, to be not more than a thousand, but just so many. And they guard this sacred gold with the utmost care, and they propitiate it with great sacrifices every year. And if anyone, having the sacred gold, should fall asleep in the open air during the festival, the Scythians say that he will not live through the year. And for this reason, as much land is given to him as he can ride around in one day. And of the country being large and having three divisions, Colaxaïs established the kingdoms for his own sons, and made one of them the greatest, in which the gold is guarded. And they say that beyond the northern neighboring lands of their country, it is not possible to see or travel further, because of feathers falling: for both the earth and the air are full of feathers, and these are what obstruct the sight.
8. The Scythians indeed thus speak concerning themselves and the land above them, but the Greeks who inhabit the Pontus thus speak. Heracles, driving the cattle of Geryones, came to this land, which was then a desert, and which the Scythians now inhabit. Geryones, however, dwelt outside the Pontus, inhabiting the island which the Greeks call Erytheia, near Gadeira, outside the pillars of Heracles upon the Ocean. The Ocean, they say, beginning from the sunrise, flows around the whole earth, but they do not prove it by facts. From there Heracles came to the land now called Scythia, and having encountered winter and frost, he put on the lion's skin and fell asleep, and the horses that were grazing under the chariot disappeared by divine chance during this time.
9. When Heracles awoke, he searched, and having gone through all the land, he finally arrived at the land called Woodland. There, he found a half-virgin creature in a cave, a double-formed serpent, with the upper part from the buttocks being a woman, and the lower part being a snake. Seeing and marveling at her, he tried to ask if she had seen wandering horses. She said she had them herself and would not give them back to him until she had intercourse with him. So Heracles had intercourse for this reward. She indeed delayed the return of the horses, wanting to spend as much time as possible with Heracles, and he, having received them, wanted to leave. Finally, giving them back, she said, "I saved these horses when they came here, and you provided salvation. For I have three children from you. When these children become of age, tell me what I should do, whether I should settle them here (for I have power over this land) or send them to you." She asked this, and they say he replied to her, "When you see the children grown up, do this and you will not be mistaken: if you see any of them stretching this bow like this and fastening this belt like this, make him a settler of this land. But if any of them fall short of these tasks that I command, send him out of the land. And by doing this, you will be pleased and you will do what has been commanded."
10. Indeed, having given her one of the bows (for Heracles used to carry two) and having shown her the belt with a golden vessel attached to its clasp, he left. And when the children were grown, she named them Agathyrsus, Gelonus, and Scythes, and remembering the instructions, she herself carried out the tasks. And indeed, two of the children, Agathyrsus and Gelonus, not being able to reach the proposed contest, were sent away from the land by their mother, but the youngest of them, Scythes, having accomplished it, remained in the land. And from Scythes, the son of Heracles, the kings of the Scythians were always born, and from the vessel, even to this day, the Scythians wear vessels from their belts. The mother alone devised this for Scythes. These things are said by the Greeks who inhabit Pontus.
11. There is also another account which goes like this, to which I am most inclined: the nomadic Scythians dwelling in Asia, being oppressed by war by the Massagetae, crossed the river Araxes and came to the land of the Cimmerians (for the land which the Scythians now inhabit is said to have been in ancient times the land of the Cimmerians); and the Cimmerians, when the Scythians were coming against them, took counsel as to how they should deal with a great army coming against them, and their opinions were divided, both of them being vehement, but the opinion of the kings was the better: for the opinion of the common people was that it would be best to depart and not run the risk of remaining before the dust, while the opinion of the kings was to fight for their land with those who were coming against them. So the common people were not willing to be persuaded either by the kings or the kings by the common people; and the common people thought it best to depart without fighting and to deliver up the land to those who were coming against them, while the kings thought it best to lie dead in their own land and not to flee together with the common people, considering both the good things they had enjoyed and the evil things which they would suffer if they fled from their native land. And when they had decided on these things, they separated and fought against each other with equal numbers. And the common people of the Cimmerians, having buried all those who had died by their own hands by the river Tyras (and their tomb is still visible), made their exit from the land in this way; and the Scythians, having come upon the land, found it deserted.
12. And now there are indeed Cimmerian walls in Scythia, and there are Cimmerian ferry crossings, and there is also a name for the region, Cimmeria, and there is the Cimmerian Bosporus called: the Cimmerians are seen fleeing to Asia from the Scythians and founding the peninsula, in which now the Greek city of Sinope is settled. And the Scythians are also visible chasing them and invading the Median land, missing the way: for the Cimmerians always fled along the sea, and the Scythians, having the Caucasus on their right, pursued until they invaded the Median land, being led into the inland of the way. And this is another story told, popular among both Greeks and foreigners.
13. Aristeas, son of Caüstrobius, a man from Proconnesus, said in his poem that he came to the Issedones, having become inspired by the bright-shining Phoebus. He said that beyond the Issedones dwell the one-eyed Arimaspians, and beyond them the gold-guarding griffins, and beyond these the Hyperboreans, who reach the sea. So, all these people, except for the Hyperboreans, starting with the Arimaspians, are always attacking their neighboring lands. The Arimaspians drive the Issedones out of their territory, and the Issedones drive the Scythians out, while the Cimmerians, who live by the southern sea, are forced to leave their land under pressure from the Scythians. Thus, this account does not agree with the Scythians' account of this region.
14. And from where Aristeas, who said these things, was, I have said; but the story I heard about him in Proconnesus and Cyzicus, I will tell. For they say that Aristeas, being of the citizens not of a lesser family, having entered a fuller's shop in Proconnesus, died; and the fuller, having closed the workshop, went to announce to the relatives of the dead man. And when the story was already scattered throughout the city that Aristeas was dead, they say that a man from Cyzicus arrived, having come from the city of Artace, claiming to have met him going to Cyzicus and to have spoken with him. And this man strongly disputed, but the relatives of the dead man went to the fuller's shop, having the offerings as if to take him away; and when the building was opened, Aristeas appeared neither dead nor alive. And after the seventh year, they say that he appeared in Proconnesus and made these verses which are now called by the Greeks Arimaspea, and having made them, he disappeared for the second time.
15. These things indeed the cities say, and these things I know happened to the Metapontines in Italy after the second disappearance of Aristeas, 240 years later, as I found by comparing in Proconnesus and Metapontum. The Metapontines say that Aristeas himself appeared to them in their land and ordered them to set up an altar to Apollo and to place a statue with the name "Aristeas of Proconnesus" beside it. For he said to them that Apollo had come to their land, the only place in Italy, and that he himself, now being Aristeas, had followed the god, and at that time, when he accompanied the god, he was a crow. And after saying these things, he disappeared, and they, the Metapontines, say that they sent to Delphi to ask the god what the vision of the man meant. And the Pythian priestess ordered them to obey the vision, and if they obeyed, it would be better for them. And they, having accepted these things, carried them out completely. And now there stands a statue with the name "Aristeas" beside the image of Apollo, and around it bay trees stand; and the image is set up in the marketplace. Let so much be said about Aristeas now.
16. Of the land, about which this account is set to be told, no one knows accurately what lies to the north: for I am not able to learn from anyone who claims to have seen it with their own eyes. Indeed, not even Aristeas, of whom I made mention a little earlier, not even he, in his verses, said that he went further than the Issedones; but he spoke of the northern regions from hearsay, saying that the Issedones were the ones who told these things. But as far as we were able to reach the furthest extent with certainty by hearsay, all shall be told.
17. From the trading post of the Borysthenites (for this is the middlemost of all the coastal regions of Scythia), from this place, first the Callippidae dwell, being Greek Scythians, and beyond these, another nation who are called Alazones. These, both the Callippidae and the Alazones, practice the same customs as the Scythians in other respects, but they sow and eat grain, and onions, and garlic, and lentils, and millet. Beyond the Alazones, Scythian farmers dwell, who do not sow grain for consumption, but for sale. Below these, the Neuri dwell. To the north wind of the Neuri, the land is uninhabited by humans, as far as we know.
18. These tribes, then, are near the Hypanis River, to the west of the Borysthenes River. But crossing the Borysthenes River from the sea, first there is the Woodlands tribe, and going up from there, the Scythian farmers dwell, whom the Greeks living by the Hypanis River call Borystheneïtae, and they themselves call Olbiopolitae. So these farming Scythians occupy a land that extends to the east for a three-day journey, reaching a river named Panticapes, and to the north wind for an eleven-day voyage up the Borysthenes River. Already, however, above these, there is a long stretch of desolate land. After this desolation, the Man-eaters dwell, being a separate nation and not at all Scythian. And below them, there is already truly desolate land, and no nation of humans, as far as we know.
19. But to the east of these farming Scythians, having crossed the Panticapes River, nomadic Scythians already inhabit, neither sowing anything nor plowing: and all this land is bare of trees except for the Woodlands. These nomads, however, inhabit a region extending to the east for a journey of fourteen days, reaching the Gerrus River.
20. Beyond the Gerrus River, indeed, these so-called royal lands are, and Scythians who are the best and most numerous and considering the other Scythians to be their slaves: and these people inhabit, on the one hand, towards the south to the Tauric land, and on the other hand, towards the east, both to the trench, which those born from the blind men dug, and to the trading place called The Cliffs on the Maeetian Lake: their lands, however, extend to the Tanais River. And the lands above, towards the north wind, of the royal Scythians are inhabited by the Blackcloaks, another nation and not Scythian. And above the Blackcloaks, there are marshes and the land is deserted by humans, as far as we know.
21. Crossing the Tanaïs River, the land is no longer Scythian, but the first region belongs to the Sauromatae, who, starting from the inner part of the Maeetian Lake, inhabit the area towards the north wind for a journey of fifteen days, being entirely bare of both wild and cultivated trees. And beyond them, the Budini dwell, occupying the second region, inhabiting a land full of various kinds of forests.
22. To the north of the Budini, there is first a desolate land for a journey of seven days; and after the desolate land, inclining more towards the east wind, the Thyssagetae dwell, a numerous and distinct nation; they live by hunting. Continuous with these, in the same places, are settled those who are called the Iyrcae, and they also live by hunting in the following manner: having climbed a tree, they lie in wait; and the trees are thick throughout the whole country. Each man has a horse trained to lie down on its belly for the sake of being low, and a dog; and when he sees the wild beast from the tree, having shot at it, he mounts his horse and pursues it, and the dog follows. Beyond these, inclining towards the east, other Scythians dwell, who have revolted from the Royal Scythians and have thus come to this place.
23. Up to this point, indeed, the land of these Scythians is all flat and deep-soiled, but from there it is rocky and rugged. And having passed through the rugged land, many people live beneath high mountains, who are said to be all bald from birth, both men and women alike, and snub-nosed and having large beards, and uttering a peculiar voice, and using Scythian clothing, and living from trees. The tree from which they live has a Pontic name, and its size is mostly like a fig tree. And it bears fruit equal to a bean, and it has a kernel. When this becomes ripe, they strain it through garments, and from it flows a thick and black substance: and the name for the flowing substance is "aschu": this they both lick and drink mixed with milk, and from its thickness they compose cakes and eat them. For they have not many sheep. For the pastures there are not at all serious. And each person lives under a tree, in winter indeed when the tree is covered with a white, dry felt, but in summer without felt. These people are harmed by no one: for they are said to be sacred: nor does any warlike weapon appear. And these are the ones who settle the disputes for their neighbors, and whoever flees and takes refuge with them is harmed by no one: and their name is Argippeans.
24. Up to now, indeed, there is much information about the land of these bald men and the nations nearby: for some Scythians arrive to them, from whom it is not difficult to learn, and also from the Greeks of the trading port near Borysthenes and the other trading ports in Pontus: but when Scythians come to them, they communicate through seven interpreters and seven languages.
25. Up to these indeed, it is known; but of the land above the bald men, no one can accurately say. For high, impassable mountains cut off, and no one crosses them. These bald men say, to me indeed not speaking credibly, that goat-footed men inhabit the mountains, and beyond these are other people who sleep for six months. But I do not accept this at the beginning; rather, the land towards the east of the bald men is known accurately to be inhabited by the Issedones, but the land below towards the north wind is not known either by the bald men or by the Issedones, except for what they say.
26. But the Issedones are said to use these customs. When a man's father dies, all the relatives bring sheep, and then, having sacrificed these and cut up the meat, they cut up also the body of the deceased parent, and, having mixed all the flesh together, they set forth a feast. And his head, having stripped it and cleaned it, they gild and then use it as an image, performing great annual sacrifices. A son does this for his father, just as the Greeks celebrate the festivals for the dead. Moreover, these people are said to be just, and the women have equal power with the men, just as the men do.
27. Indeed, these people are also known, and from them, the Issedones who are said to be above, speak of one-eyed men and gold-guarding griffins. The Scythians, having received this from them, say it, and from the Scythians, we, the others, have learned and call them in the Scythian language Arimaspians: for the Scythians call "arima" one, and "spou" eye.
28. This entire region, which has been described, is indeed so wintry that for eight months of the year, the frost becomes unbearable, during which if you pour water, you will not make mud, but if you light a fire, you will make mud. The sea freezes, and the whole Cimmerian Bosporus, and upon the ice, the Scythians who dwell within the trench wage war and drive their wagons across to the land of the Sindi. Thus, indeed, for eight months, winter prevails, and for the remaining four months, it is still cold. This winter is separated from the ways of all other winters that occur in other regions, in that during the rainy season, it does not rain anything worth mentioning, but during the summer, when it rains, it does not stop. Thunderstorms occur during the other season, but they do not occur so often; however, during the summer, they are frequent. And if a thunderstorm occurs during the winter, it is considered a wonder to be marveled at. Thus, if an earthquake occurs, whether in summer or winter, in Scythia, it is considered a wonder. Horses, indeed, endure this winter, but mules and donkeys do not endure it at all. In the other region, horses, indeed, standing in the frost, suffer frostbite, but donkeys and mules endure it.
29. It seems to me that the race of oxen does not grow horns there for this reason: and a verse of Homer in the Odyssey bears witness to my opinion, having thus said, "And Libya, where lambs are born with horns straightaway," rightly spoken, that in the warm regions, horns quickly come forth, but in the strong colds, either the animals do not grow horns at all or those that grow them grow them with difficulty.
30. In that place, indeed, now on account of the cold, these things happen. But I wonder (for indeed from the beginning my inquiry sought additions) that in the whole land of Elis, mules are not able to be produced, neither because of the coldness of the place nor because of any other evident cause. The Eleans themselves say that it is because of a curse that mules are not produced among them, but when the time comes for the mares to conceive, they drive them out to the neighboring regions, and then they send the donkeys after them, until the mares hold in their womb; and then they drive them back.
31. Concerning the feathers that the Scythians say fill the air so densely that one is unable to see or travel through the land beyond, I hold this opinion: in the northern part of this country, snow always falls, less in the summer than in the winter, as is natural. Now then, whoever has seen heavy snow falling nearby knows what I am saying: for the snow is like feathers, and because of this winter being such, the regions north of this continent are uninhabited. Therefore, I think that the Scythians and their neighbors, when speaking of feathers, are referring to the snow. These, then, are the most distant parts that are said to exist, which I have now discussed.
32. Concerning the Hyperborean people, neither the Scythians say anything nor any others of those dwelling here, except perhaps the Issedones. But as I think, not even these say anything; for the Scythians would also speak, just as they speak about the one-eyed men. However, there is mention of the Hyperboreans in Hesiod, and there is also in Homer's "The Heroes' Sons," if indeed Homer truly composed these verses.
33. The Delians indeed say much more about them than any others, claiming that sacred offerings bound in straw are brought from the Hyperboreans and arrive among the Scythians, and from the Scythians, each of the neighboring peoples in turn receives them and sends them on towards the west, each to their neighbors, until they reach the Adriatic Sea, from where they are sent south and the first Greeks to receive them are the Dodonaeans. From them, they descend to the Melian Gulf and pass through Euboea, being sent from city to city until they reach Carystus; and from there, they bypass Andros: for the Carystians are the ones who carry them to Tenos, and the Tenians to Delos. Thus, they say, these sacred offerings arrive in Delos. But first, the Hyperboreans sent the sacred offerings carried by two maidens, whom the Delians call Hyperoche and Laodice; and with them, the Hyperboreans sent for the sake of their safety five men of their citizens as escorts, who now are called Perpherees and have great honors in Delos. But when those sent by the Hyperboreans did not return, they were greatly troubled, fearing that they would always send and not receive them back, so they carried the sacred offerings bound in straw to their borders and instructed their neighbors to send them on from themselves to another nation. And in this way, they say, the sacred offerings arrive in Delos. But I myself know that this is done with these sacred offerings: the Thracian and Paeonian women, when they sacrifice to the Royal Artemis, hold the sacred offerings without straw.
34. And indeed, I know that they perform these rites: for the maidens who died in Delos, having come from the Hyperboreans, both the girls and the boys of the Delians cut their hair. The girls, before marriage, cut off a lock of hair and, having wrapped it around a spindle, place it on the tomb (and the tomb is inside, to the left hand as one enters the sanctuary of Artemis, and an olive tree has grown upon it); and the boys of the Delians, having wrapped some of their hair around a green stalk, also place it on the tomb.
35. These indeed have this honor from the inhabitants of Delos. The same people say that both Arge and Opis, being virgins from the Hyperboreans, came to Delos by the same people before Hyperoche and Laodice. Now these, having brought offerings to Eileithyia in place of the swift childbirth, arrived, but they say that Arge and Opis arrived with the gods themselves and other honors were given to them by them: for the women gather for them, naming the names in the hymn which Olen, a Lycian man, made for them, and having learned from them, both islanders and Ionians sing hymns to Opis and Arge, naming and gathering (this Olen also made the other ancient hymns, having come from Lycia, which are sung in Delos), and of the thigh bones being burnt on the altar, this ash is thrown upon the burial site of both Opis and Arge. And their burial site is behind the temple of Artemis, turned towards the dawn, very close to the dining hall of the people of Ceos.
36. And let this be said about the Hyperboreans: for I do not speak of the story of Abaris, who was said to be a Hyperborean and carried the arrow around the whole earth without eating anything. If there are some people beyond the north wind, there are also others beyond the south wind. I laugh seeing many who have already drawn the circuits of the earth and none of them have explained it sensibly: they write of the Ocean flowing around the earth, which is circular as if from a lathe, and they make Asia equal to Europe. For in a few words, I will show the size of each of them and what kind of representation each one is.
37. The Persians dwell extending to the southern sea, the one called the Red Sea; and above the Persians, towards the north wind, dwell the Medes; and above the Medes, the Saspeires; and above the Saspeires, the Colchians, extending to the northern sea, into which the Phasis river pours out. These four nations dwell from sea to sea.
38. From there, the coasts to the west are divided into two, extending from it to the sea, which I will describe: from there, indeed, the other coast to the north, beginning from the Phasis, stretches out to the sea, along both the Pontus and the Hellespont, as far as Sigeum of the Troad; and to the south, the same coast, from the Myriandric Gulf situated near Phoenicia, extends to the sea, as far as the Triopian headland. And in this coast dwell thirty nations of people.
39. This, then, is the second of the peninsulas, and the other one, beginning from the Persians, extends to the Red Sea, both the Persian land and the one stretching from it, Assyria, and from Assyria, Arabia. This one ends, not ending unless by convention, at the Arabian Gulf, into which Darius led a canal from the Nile. Now, from the Persians to Phoenicia, there is a wide and extensive area of land. But from Phoenicia, this coast runs along this sea, passing through Syrian Palestine and Egypt, to the end. In this land, there are only three nations.
40. These, indeed, from the Persians, the parts towards the west of Asia are: but above the Persians and Medes and Saspires and Colchians, the parts towards the east and the rising sun, from there, on one side, the Red Sea runs along, and towards the north, both the Caspian Sea and the Araxes river, flowing towards the rising sun. Up to India, Asia is inhabited; but from there on, towards the east, it is already a desert, and no one can say what kind of land it is.
41. Such, indeed, and so great is Asia, and Libya is on the other coast: for from Egypt, Libya already extends. Now, along Egypt, this coast is narrow: for from this sea to the Red Sea, there are ten myriad orguia, which would be a thousand stades: but from this narrow part, the coast which is called Libya happens to be very wide.
42. I marvel, therefore, at those who have divided and marked off Libya, Asia, and Europe; for there is a great difference between them. In length, indeed, Europe extends along both, but in breadth, it does not seem to me to be worthy of comparison. For Libya shows itself to be surrounded by water, except as much of it as borders on Asia, which was first proved by Necos, the Egyptian king, as far as we know. After he had stopped digging the canal leading from the Nile to the Arabian Gulf, he sent Phoenician men in ships, instructing them to sail back through the Pillars of Heracles until they reached the northern sea and thus returned to Egypt. So, the Phoenicians, setting out from the Red Sea, sailed the southern sea; and when it was autumn, they would approach and sow the land, wherever they happened to be sailing along Libya, and wait for the harvest; and having reaped the corn, they would sail on, so that after two years had passed, in the third year, they rounded the Pillars of Heracles and arrived in Egypt. And they reported to me, not believable to me, but perhaps to another, that as they sailed around Libya, they had the sun on their right.
43. Thus, indeed, this was the first knowledge of Libya, and after that, the Carthaginians are the ones who say: for Sataspes, the man of Teaspes, an Achaemenid, did not sail around Libya, having been sent for this very purpose, but fearing both the length of the voyage and the desolation, he went back, and did not complete the task his mother had set for him. For he had forced the virgin daughter of Zopyrus, the son of Megabyzus; and then, when he was about to be impaled by King Xerxes for this very reason, the mother of Sataspes, being the sister of Darius, begged him off, saying that she would impose a greater punishment on him than that: for it would be necessary for him to sail around Libya until he arrived, having sailed around it, at the Arabian Gulf. And when Xerxes agreed to these terms, Sataspes, having arrived in Egypt and having taken both a ship and sailors from them, sailed to the Pillars of Heracles; and having sailed through and rounded the promontory of Libya, which is called Solois, he sailed towards the south; and having crossed a great sea in many months, and since he always needed to sail further, he turned back and sailed away to Egypt. And having arrived from there to King Xerxes, he said, claiming that he sailed past the farthest lands of men, who were small and wore clothing dyed with the color of the Phoenician, who, as soon as they were attacked by them with the ship, fled to the mountains, leaving their cities: and they themselves, going in, did no harm, but only took food from them. And he said that this was the reason he did not sail completely around Libya, that the ship was no longer able to go forward but was held back. But Xerxes, not forgiving him, said that he was telling the truth, and not having completed the assigned task, impaled him, imposing the ancient penalty. And this Sataspes' eunuch fled to Samos, after he learned as quickly as possible that his master had died, having with him a great amount of money, which a man of Samos took possession of, whose name I know but willingly forget.
44. Most of Asia was discovered by Darius, who, desiring to know the Indus River, which is the second of all rivers to produce crocodiles, sent ships with men whom he trusted to speak the truth, including Scylax, a man from Caryanda. They, setting out from the city of Caspatyrus and the Pactyic land, sailed down the river towards the east and the rising sun to the sea, and sailing through the sea towards the west, they arrived in the thirtieth month at this place from which the king of the Egyptians sent the Phoenicians, whom I mentioned earlier, to sail around Libya. After these men had sailed around, Darius subdued the Indians and made use of this sea. Thus, most of Asia, except for the parts towards the rising sun, has been discovered, presenting similarities to Libya.
45. But Europe, in no way, is clearly known, neither the parts towards the rising sun nor the parts towards the north, if it is indeed surrounded by water; but in length, it is known to extend alongside both Asia and Libya. And I do not have a way to understand why, being one land, it has three names, each having a woman's name, and why boundaries were set for it by the Egyptian Nile river and the Colchian Phasis river (although some say the Maeetian Tanaïs river and the Cimmerian Ferries), nor can I learn about those who divided the names and from where they took the names. For already, Libya is said by many Greeks to have the name of a native woman, and Asia to have the name of the wife of Prometheus. And the Lydians partake of this name, saying that Asia was named after Asies, the son of Cotys and the grandson of Manes, but not after the wife of Prometheus, Asia. And from this, the clan in Sardis is also called Asiad. But Europe, neither if it is surrounded by water is known in relation to any people, nor from where it took this name, nor who appears to be the one who named it, unless we will say that the land took the name from the Tyrian Europa; but before that, it was apparently nameless like the other lands. But this Europa, indeed, appears to be from Asia and not reaching the land which is now called Europe by the Greeks, but only as far as from Phoenicia to Crete, and from Crete to Lycia. Let these things now be said to this extent: for we will use the names established by custom.
46. The Euxine Pontus, against which Darius once campaigned, is home to the most ignorant tribes of all the lands. For we have no nation within the Pontus region that we can put forth as particularly wise, nor do we know of any learned man who has arisen from there, apart from the Scythian people and Anacharsis. The Scythian race, indeed, has made the greatest discovery in the most important of human affairs that we know of, although I do not admire them in all other respects: they have found a way to make it so that no one can attack them and escape, and to capture them when they do not wish to be found is not possible. For they have neither cities nor walls built, but being all nomadic and mounted archers, they live not from plowing but from livestock, and their dwellings are on their wagons. How, then, would these people not be both invincible and difficult to approach?
47. This discovery has been made by them in a land that is suitable for their needs and with rivers that are their allies. For the land being flat, it is both grassy and well-watered, and rivers flow through it, not much fewer in number than the canals in Egypt. And as many of them are famous and navigable from the sea, I will name these: the Ister indeed with its five mouths, and after it the Tyras, and the Hypanis, and the Borysthenes, and the Panticapes, and the Hypacuris, and the Gerrhus, and the Tanaïs. And these flow in the following ways.
48. The Ister, indeed, being the greatest of all rivers that we know, always flows equally to itself both in summer and winter, and first from the west of those flowing in the Scythian land, it has become the greatest in this way: other rivers indeed pouring into it are these which make it great, through the Scythian land, five indeed flowing, the Scythians call the one Porata, the Greeks, however, Pyretus, and another Tiarantus, and Ararus, and Naparis, and Ordessus. The first mentioned of the rivers, being great and flowing towards the east, shares its water with the Ister, the second mentioned Tiarantus, more towards the west and smaller, and indeed the Ararus, and the Naparis, and the Ordessus, going between these, they discharge into the Ister.
49. These native-born Scythian rivers contribute to the Ister's size. Indeed, the Maris river, flowing from the Agathyrsi, mixes with the Ister, and from the heights of Haemus, three other large rivers flowing towards the north wind, Atlas, Auras, and Tibisis, discharge into it. Flowing through Thrace and the land of the Crobyzi Thracians, Athrys, Noes, and Artanes empty into the Ister. And from the Paeonians and the Rhodope mountain, the Cius river, splitting the Haemus in the middle, flows out into it. Flowing from the Illyrians towards the north wind, the Angrus river discharges into the Triballic plain and into the Brongus river, and the Brongus into the Ister; thus, the Ister receives both of these great rivers. And from the country above the Ombrici, the Carpis river and another river, Alpis, flowing towards the north wind, also flow out into it. For indeed, the Ister flows through all of Europe, beginning from the Celts, who dwell furthest towards the setting sun, after the Cynetes, in Europe; and flowing through all of Europe, it discharges into the side of Scythia.
50. Of these, then, having been mentioned and many others contributing their water, the Ister becomes the greatest of rivers, since the Nile, indeed, prevails in quantity by contributing water one to one. For equal to this, neither any river nor any spring contributing to the multitude is mixed with it. The Ister, however, always flows equally in both summer and winter, according to something like this, as it seems to me: of the winter, as much as it is, it becomes a little greater than its own nature. For this land is rained upon very little in the winter, and it is covered with snow everywhere. But of the summer, the snow that fell in the winter, being abundant, melting from all sides, gives into the Ister. This snow, indeed, giving into it, fills it up, and many heavy rains together with it; for it rains, indeed, in the summer. By how much more water the sun draws upon itself in the summer than in the winter, by so much the things mixed with the Ister are many times more in the summer than in the winter. And these things being set against each other, a balancing takes place, so that it always appears to be equal, being such.
51. Indeed, one of the rivers among the Scythians is the Ister, and after this one, there is the Tyras, which originates from the north wind and begins to flow from a large lake that borders both the Scythian and Neurian lands. And at its mouth, Greeks dwell who are called Tyritae.
52. The third river, the Hypanis, indeed begins from Scythia, and flows from a large lake around which wild, white horses graze; this lake is rightly called the mother of the Hypanis. So, rising from this, the Hypanis river flows for a journey of five days, being shallow and sweet, but from this point, for a journey of four days towards the sea, it is terribly bitter; for a bitter spring flows into it, being so bitter that, although small in size, it mixes with the great river in a short distance. This spring is in the mountains of the land of both the farming Scythians and the Alazones; and the name of the spring, and the place from which it flows, is Exampaeus in Scythian, but in the Greek language, Sacred Ways. Both the Tyras and the Hypanis rivers come together at the Alazones, but from this point, each turns away and flows, widening the distance between them.
53. The fourth river is the Borysthenes, which is the greatest after the Ister among these and the most productive, in our opinions, not only of the Scythian rivers but also of all the others, except for the Egyptian Nile; for with this one, it is not possible for any other river to be compared. But of the remaining ones, the Borysthenes is the most productive, which provides the most beautiful pastures and the most easily managed for cattle, and the best fish, both the most and the most distinguished, and it is the sweetest to drink, and it flows clean beside the muddy ones, and the best seed is produced beside it, and the land, in which the region is not sown, is the deepest; and salts are formed by themselves at its mouth, which are inexhaustible; and it provides large spineless fish, which they call sturgeons, for salting, and many other things worthy of wonder. Until now, it is known flowing through the land of the Gerrheans, which is a journey of forty days, flowing from the north wind; but the region above through which it flows, no one is able to tell of; but it appears to flow through a desert into the land of the farming Scythians; for these Scythians live beside it for a journey of ten days. But of this river alone and the Nile, I am not able to tell of the sources, but I think that no one of the Greeks is either. And indeed, the Borysthenes, flowing near the sea, becomes and is mixed with the Hypanis into the same marsh. And the land between these rivers, being a projection of the region, is called Hippolaus' promontory, and in it, a temple of Demeter is built; and beyond the temple, on the Hypanis, the Borystheneïtae live.
54. These things are from these rivers, and after them, there is another fifth river, whose name is Panticapas. This river also flows from the north and from a lake, and the land between this and the Borysthenes is inhabited by the farming Scythians. It flows out into the wooded area, and after passing this, it mixes with the Borysthenes.
55. The sixth river is the Hypacuris, which indeed originates from a lake, and flowing through the middle of the nomadic Scythians, it gives out near the city of Carcine, leading to the right both the Woodland and the so-called Racecourse of Achilles.
56. The seventh river, Gerrhus, indeed branches off from the Borysthenes in this region where the Borysthenes is known: now it branches off from this region, and it has the name which the region itself has, Gerrhus; and flowing into the sea, it bounds both the land of the nomads and the land of the Royal Scythians, and it flows out into the Hypacuris.
57. The eighth river indeed is the Tanaïs, which flows from a great lake, originating and discharging into an even larger lake called Maeetian, which separates the Royal Scythians and the Sauromatae. And into this Tanaïs, another river flows, which has the name Hyrgis.
58. To the famous rivers, indeed, the Scythians have thus prepared, and to the cattle, the land that grows in Scythia is the most bile-producing of all the lands we know. And for the cattle that are opened up, it is clear that this is the case.
59. The greatest things are indeed thus well-provided for them, and the remaining customs are arranged for them in this way. They propitiate these gods alone: Hestia most of all, then Zeus and Earth, believing Earth to be the wife of Zeus, and after these, Apollo and the Heavenly Aphrodite and Heracles and Ares. All Scythians have adopted these gods, and those called the Royal Scythians also sacrifice to Poseidon. In the Scythian language, Hestia is called Tabiti, Zeus is most rightly called Papaeus in my opinion, Earth is Api, Apollo is Goetosyrus, the Heavenly Aphrodite is Argimpasa, and Poseidon is Thagimasadas. They do not consider making images, altars, and temples except for Ares. They do consider this for him.
60. The same sacrifice has been established for all concerning all the sacred things alike, being performed in this way: the sacred animal itself stands with its front legs tied together, and the sacrificer, standing behind the animal, pulls the beginning of the rope and throws it down, and as the sacred animal falls, he calls upon the god to whom he sacrifices, and then he puts a noose around the neck and, inserting a stick, he twists it and strangles it, neither kindling a fire nor beginning nor pouring a libation: but having strangled and skinned it, he turns to cooking it.
61. Since the Scythian land is greatly lacking in wood, they have found the following method for cooking their meat: when they have flayed the sacrificial animals, they strip the bones of the meat, then, if they happen to have them, they throw the meat into native cauldrons, which are very similar to the mixing bowls of Lesbos, except that they are much larger. Throwing the meat into these, they cook it by setting fire to the bones of the sacrificial animals beneath. If, however, they do not have a cauldron, they put the meat into the stomachs of the sacrificial animals, mixing in water, and they cook it by setting fire to the bones beneath. The meat is cooked very well, and the stomachs easily hold the meat stripped from the bones. Thus, both the ox and the other sacrificial animals each cook themselves. When the meat is cooked, the sacrificer, taking the first portion of the meat and the entrails, throws it in front of him. They also sacrifice other grazing animals, especially horses.
62. To the other gods, they sacrifice in this way and with these animals, but to Ares, they do so thus. In each of their regions, there is established for them a sanctuary of Ares, such as this: bundles of sticks are heaped together, with a length and width of about three stadia, and a height somewhat less; on top of this, a flat, square surface has been made, and three of the sides are steep, while one is climbable. Each year, they pile on 150 wagon-loads of sticks, for it always sinks down under the weight of the winters. On top of this sacred structure, an ancient iron scimitar is set up for each tribe, and this is the statue of Ares. To this scimitar, they bring yearly sacrifices of sheep, goats, and horses, and indeed, they sacrifice even more to it than to the other gods. As many of the enemies as they capture alive, they sacrifice one man out of every hundred, not in the same way as the sheep, but in a different way. For when they have poured wine over their heads, they cut the throats of the men into a bowl, and then, having carried it up onto the mound of sticks, they pour the blood over the scimitar. They carry this up, and below, near the sacred structure, they do the following: having cut off all the right arms and hands of the slain men, they throw them into the air, and then, having performed the other sacrifices, they depart. The arm lies where it falls, and the body is separate.
63. Now these sacrifices are established for them. But they do not consider pigs at all, nor do they wish to raise them in their land at all.
64. The things concerning war for them are arranged in this way: when a Scythian man brings down the first man, he drinks of the blood, and as many as he may kill in the battle, he carries away the heads of these to the king. For indeed, having brought a head, he shares in the spoils they may take, but not having brought one, he does not. And he flays it in this manner: cutting around in a circle near the ears and taking hold of the head, he shakes it out, and afterward, having scraped it with a rib of an ox, he softens it with his hands, and having prepared it like a hand towel, he hangs it from the bridle of the horse he himself drives, and from this he attaches it and takes delight: for whoever may have the most skins as hand towels, this man is judged to be the best. And many of them make cloaks for themselves from the flayed skins, sewing them together like felt cloaks. And many of the men, having flayed the right hands of their dead enemies, make covers for their quivers with their own nails. And indeed, the skin of a human is both thick and shiny, and it is nearly the most shiny of all skins in whiteness. And many, having flayed entire men and stretched them out on wooden frames, carry them around on horses.
65. These things indeed thus are customary for them, but the heads themselves, not of all but of the most hated, they do this: having cut off each one all below the eyebrows, they clean out. And if indeed he is poor, he, having stretched only the raw hide around the outside, uses it thus; but if he is rich, he stretches the raw hide around, and having gilded the inside, he uses it thus as a cup. They do this also from their own household if they become at odds with them, and if he prevails over him before the king, and when foreign guests come who they would speak of, they bring forth these heads and recount how they being relatives made war against them and they themselves prevailed over them, speaking of this as manly valor.
66. Once in each year, each governor in his own province mixes a bowl of wine, from which those Scythians who have killed enemies may drink. But those who have not achieved this feat may not taste this wine, but must sit apart, dishonored. This is the greatest disgrace for them. And those who have killed many men may drink from two cups at once.
67. There are many soothsayers among the Scythians, who prophesy with numerous willow rods in this manner: when they bring in large bundles of rods, placing them on the ground, they unravel them, and as they lay down each rod one by one, they make their predictions, and while saying these things, they gather the rods back and again place them together one by one. This is their ancestral art of divination. The Enarees, who are androgynous, say that Aphrodite gave them the art of divination: they prophesy with the bark of a lime-tree: when they split the lime-tree into three strands, intertwining them with their own fingers and unraveling them, they use them.
68. When the Scythian king falls ill, he sends for three of the most esteemed soothsayers, who prophesy in the aforementioned manner. They usually say this above all else, that such and such a citizen has sworn falsely by the royal hearth, naming whoever they may. Now, swearing by the royal hearth is the most solemn oath for the Scythians when they wish to swear their greatest oaths. Immediately, the one they claim to have sworn falsely is brought forth, and the soothsayers accuse him of appearing to have sworn falsely by the royal hearth in their divination, and for this reason, the king suffers. But the accused denies it, saying he did not swear falsely, and he speaks vehemently. As he denies it, the king sends for twice as many soothsayers. If these, too, looking into their divination, bind him to have sworn falsely, they cut off his head straightaway, and the first soothsayers divide his possessions among themselves. But if the soothsayers who come later release him, other soothsayers are present, and very different ones indeed. So, if the majority of them release the man, it is decided that the first soothsayers themselves must be put to death.
69. Indeed, they destroy them in this manner: when they fill a wagon with brushwood and yoke oxen to it, having bound the soothsayers' feet and tied their hands behind their backs and gagged them, they thrust them into the middle of the brushwood, and having set it on fire, they drive the oxen away in terror. Many oxen are indeed burned to death together with the soothsayers, but many, having been scorched all around, escape when their connecting pole is burned through. They burn the soothsayers in the manner mentioned for other reasons as well, calling them false prophets. And if the king kills them, he does not leave their children, but he kills all the males and does not harm the females.
70. The Scythians make oaths in this way with those they make them with: pouring wine into a large earthenware cup, they mix the blood of those cutting the oath, having struck a small part of the body with a knife underneath, and then dipping into the cup a dagger, arrows, a battle-axe, and a javelin. And when they do these things, they utter many curses, and then they themselves, those making the oath, and the most worthy of the followers drink it.
71. The tombs of the kings are in Gerrhos, where the Borysthenes is navigable: there, when their king dies, they dig a large square pit in the ground, and having prepared it, they take up the corpse, the body being covered with wax, the belly cut open and cleaned, filled with cut marsh plants, frankincense, parsley seeds, and anise, and sewn up again, and they carry it on a wagon to another nation. Those who receive the corpse perform the same rituals as the royal Scythians: they cut off a part of their ears, shave their heads, make cuts around their arms, tear their foreheads and noses, and pierce their left hands with arrows. Then they carry the king's corpse on the wagon to another nation under their rule, and those follow them to the ones who came before. When they have gone around to all with the corpse, they are in Gerrhos, the last of the nations under their rule, and in the tombs. And then, when they place the corpse in the tombs on a couch, they drive spears into the ground on either side of the corpse, stretch wooden planks over them, and then cover it with a roof of woven branches. In the remaining space of the tomb, they strangle one of the concubines and bury her, as well as the cupbearer, cook, groom, squire, and messenger, and horses, and the first fruits of all other things, and golden cups: they do not use silver or bronze. Having done these things, they all heap up a large mound of earth, competing and eagerly striving to make it as large as possible.
72. As the year comes full circle, they perform the following ritual: taking the most skilled of the remaining servants (who are native-born Scythians, for they serve those whom the king himself commands, and they do not have servants bought with money), they strangle fifty of these attendants and fifty of the finest horses, removing their innards and cleaning them, then filling them with chaff and sewing them up. They set up half of a wheel on two wooden posts, lying flat, and the other half of the wheel on another two posts, fixing many of these in such a manner. Then, having split thick wooden stakes along the length of the horses up to their necks, they hoist them onto the wheels: the front wheels support the horses' shoulders, while the rear wheels support their bellies near the thighs; both legs hang suspended in the air. They insert bridles and bits into the horses' mouths and stretch them out in front of them, then fasten them with pegs. As for the fifty strangled young men, they hoist each one onto a horse, mounting them in this way: they split an upright wooden stake along the spine of each corpse up to the neck; below, the stake protrudes, and they fasten it to the other stake that runs through the horse. Having set up these horsemen in a circle around the tomb, they ride away.
73. Thus indeed they bury their kings: but when other Scythians die, their nearest relatives place them in wagons and take them to their friends, lying in the wagons. Each of them, receiving the deceased, entertains the followers, and for the dead, they set before them all things in a manner similar to the others. For forty days, the common people are carried around in this way, and then they are buried. After burying them, the Scythians cleanse themselves in this manner: having anointed their heads and washed them, they do the following for their bodies: when they set up three wooden poles leaning against each other, they stretch woolen mats around these poles, and having enclosed the space as much as possible, they throw transparent stones from the fire into a pit lying in the middle of the poles and the mats.
74. There is hemp growing in their land, very similar to flax in thickness and size, but the hemp far surpasses it. This hemp grows both spontaneously and when sown, and from it, the Thracians make garments very similar to linen ones. It would be difficult for anyone who is not very familiar with it to distinguish whether it is made of linen or hemp. And for those who have not seen hemp before, they would think the garment is made of linen.
75. Of this hemp, then, the Scythians, when they have taken the seed, crawl under the mats, and then they throw the seed upon the transparent stones with the fire. The seed, when thrown, smokes and produces such a vapor as no Greek vapor-bath could surpass. The Scythians, delighted by the steam, howl. This is their substitute for bathing, for they do not wash their bodies with water at all. Their women, however, pour water over a rough stone of cypress, cedar, and frankincense wood, and then they rub this water-soaked mixture, which is thick, all over their bodies and faces. At the same time, this gives them a pleasant fragrance, and when they remove the paste on the second day, they become clean and bright.
76. But these people strongly avoid using foreign customs, neither of the others, and least of all the Greek ones, as they learned from Anacharsis and again from Scyles. For Anacharsis, after having seen much land and having accepted much wisdom from it, brought it to the customs of the Scythians, sailing through the Hellespont and approaching Cyzicus. For he found the Cyzicenes leading a very magnificent feast for the mother of the gods, and Anacharsis vowed to the mother that if he returned safely and healthy to his own, he would sacrifice in the same way as the Cyzicenes were doing and would set up an all-night festival. And when he arrived in Scythia, he went down to the so-called Hylaean (which is indeed by the Achilles' racecourse, and happens to be full of all kinds of trees), and in this place Anacharsis performed the entire feast for the goddess, having a tambourine and having dressed up images. And one of the Scythians, having discovered him doing these things, signified it to King Saulius: and he himself also coming, as he saw Anacharsis doing these things, shot him and killed him. And now if someone speaks about Anacharsis, the Scythians do not say they know him, for this reason that he went abroad to Greece and used foreign customs. But as I heard from Tymnes, the deputy of Ariapithes, he was the uncle of Idanthyrsus, the king of the Scythians, and the son of Gnurus, the son of Lycus, the son of Spargapeithes. So if Anacharsis was of this family, let it be known that he died by his brother: for Idanthyrsus was the son of Saulius, and Saulius was the one who killed Anacharsis.
77. And yet, I have already heard another account being spoken by the Peloponnesians, that Anacharsis, having been sent away by the Scythian king to become a student of Greece, and having returned back afterward, would say to the one who sent him away that all the Greeks were busy with every kind of wisdom, except for the Lacedaemonians, for these alone were able to give and receive speech sensibly. But this account has been otherwise fabricated by the Greeks themselves, and the man, as was said earlier, was destroyed.
78. This man, indeed, thus acted due to foreign customs and Greek associations. Many years later, Scyles, the son of Ariapithes, suffered similar things. For Ariapithes, the king of the Scythians, had Scyles among other sons; and this man was born from an Istrian woman and not at all from a native one; this mother taught him the Greek language and letters. After some time, Ariapithes indeed died by the treachery of Spargapithes, the king of the Agathyrsi, and Scyles received both the kingship and the wife of his father, whose name was Opoea; and this Opoea was a native woman, from whom Oricus was born to Ariapithes. And Scyles, ruling over the Scythians, was not at all pleased with the Scythian way of life, but was much more inclined towards the Greek customs due to the education he had received; and he did this: whenever he led the Scythian army to the city of the Borysthenites (these Borysthenites say that they themselves are Milesians), when Scyles came to them, he would leave the army in the suburb, and when he came to the wall and closed the gates, he would take off his Scythian attire and put on Greek clothing, and having this, he would go to the market without any attendants or anyone else; and the gates were guarded so that none of the Scythians would see him wearing this attire; and he used the other Greek way of life and made sacrifices to the gods according to the customs of the Greeks. And when he spent a month or more than this, he would depart, having put on the Scythian attire. He did these things many times, and he built a house in Borysthenes and married a local woman there.
79. But when it was fated for him to suffer misfortune, it happened from such a pretext. He desired to be initiated into the rites of Dionysus the Bacchus. And as he was about to have the ceremony performed for him, a great apparition occurred. He had in the city of the Borysthenites a great and costly enclosure, of which I made mention a little earlier, around which stood sphinxes and griffins made of white stone. Into this, the god cast a thunderbolt. And the whole enclosure was burnt down, but Scyles, for all that, performed the ceremony. The Scythians reproach the Greeks for their Bacchic revelry, saying that it is not reasonable to find out a god who leads men to madness. But when Scyles had been initiated into the Bacchic rite, one of the Borysthenites played the spy and said to the Scythians, "You laugh at us, Scythians, because we perform the Bacchic revelry and the god seizes us. Now this deity has seized your king as well, and he revels and is maddened by the god. And if you do not believe me, follow me, and I will show him to you." The Scythian chiefs followed him, and the Borysthenite led them up secretly onto a tower. Then when Scyles passed by with the revelers, and the Scythians saw him performing the Bacchic rites, they deemed it a great misfortune. And going out, they signaled to the whole army what they had seen.
80. After these things, Scyles returned to his own customs, but the Scythians, having chosen his brother Octamasades, born from the daughter of Teres, rebelled against Scyles. And he, having learned what was happening to himself and the reason for which it was done, fled to Thrace. And Octamasades, having learned these things, led an army against Thrace. And when he came to the Ister, the Thracians opposed him, and as they were about to join battle, Sitalces sent a message to Octamasades, saying such things as these: "Why must we try each other? I am the son of your sister, and you have my brother. You give me him, and I will give you your Scyles: and let neither you nor I risk ourselves in battle." Sitalces sent these things to be proclaimed: for there was with Octamasades a brother of Sitalces who had fled. And Octamasades agreed to these things, and having given his own maternal uncle to Sitalces, he received his brother Scyles. And Sitalces, having taken his brother, departed, but Octamasades cut off the head of Scyles there. Thus, the Scythians maintain their own customs, and they give such penalties to those who adopt foreign customs.
81. But the multitude of the Scythians I was not able to learn exactly, but I heard various accounts of their number: for indeed they are said to be very many and few as Scythians. However, this much was made clear to me by sight. There is a place between the river Borysthenes and the Hypanis, and its name is Exampaeus: of which I made mention a little earlier, saying that in it there is a spring of bitter water, from which the water flowing makes the Hypanis undrinkable. In this place there lies a bronze vessel, in size and six times that of the cauldron at the mouth of the Pontus, which Pausanias the son of Cleombrotus dedicated. And whoever has not seen this, I will make it clear: the bronze vessel in Scythia easily holds six hundred amphorae, and this Scythian bronze vessel is six fingers thick. This, then, the locals said was made from arrowheads. For their king, whose name was Ariantas, desiring to know this multitude of the Scythians, ordered each Scythian to bring him one arrowhead. And whoever did not bring, he threatened death. And indeed a great matter of arrowheads was collected, and it seemed good to him to make a memorial from them. From these, then, he made this bronze vessel and dedicated it in this Exampaeus. These things, then, I heard about the multitude of the Scythians.
82. This country, indeed, does not have many wonders, except that it has very great rivers and a very large number of them. But there is something worthy of admiration besides the rivers and the vastness of the plain, which shall be mentioned. They show the footprint of Heracles on a rock, which indeed seems like the step of a man, but the size is two cubits, near the Tyras river. Now this is such a thing, but I will go back to the beginning and continue the story I was telling.
83. As Darius was preparing against the Scythians and sending messengers to command some to provide infantry, others to supply ships, and others to build a bridge across the Thracian Bosporus, Artabanus, son of Hystaspes and brother of Darius, urged him by no means to make a campaign against the Scythians, enumerating the difficulties of dealing with the Scythians. But since he did not persuade him by advising good things, he ceased, and Darius, after all things were prepared for him, led the army out of Susa.
84. At this point, Oeobazus of the Persians, having three sons and all of them serving in the army, asked Darius to leave one of them behind for him. And he (Darius) said that, being a friend and asking for a moderate thing, he would leave all the sons behind. Indeed, Oeobazus was very happy, hoping that his sons had been released from the campaign. But he (Darius) ordered those in charge of this matter to kill all the sons of Oeobazus.
85. And these men, having been slaughtered, were left behind there: and Darius, after setting out from Susa, arrived at the Bosporus where the bridge had been built, near Chalcedon. Then, boarding a ship, he sailed to the so-called Dark Rocks, which the Greeks say were once moving. Sitting on a headland, he admired the Pontus, which was a sight worth seeing. For it is the most marvelous of all seas: its length is 11,100 stades, and its width, at its widest point, is 3,300 stades. The mouth of this sea is four stades wide: and the length of the neck of the mouth, which is called the Bosporus, where the bridge had been built, is 120 stades. The Bosporus extends to the Propontis: and the Propontis, being 500 stades wide and 1,400 stades long, flows into the Hellespont, which is seven stades in narrowness and 400 stades in length. And the Hellespont flows out into a chasm of the sea, which is called the Aegean.
86. These measurements have been made thus: a ship, for the most part, sails downwind in a long day's journey 70,000 orguiae, and at night 60,000. Now then, from the mouth to the Phasis (for this is the longest part of the Pontus) is a voyage of nine days and eight nights; these make 110,000 orguiae, and from these orguiae there are 11,000 stades. And to Themiscyra on the Thermodon River from the Sindic region (for this is the widest part of the Pontus) is a voyage of three days and two nights; these make 30,000 orguiae, and there are 3,300 stades. This Pontus, then, and the Bosporus and the Hellespont have been measured by me in this way and have these dimensions, and the Pontus also provides a lake that flows into it, not much smaller than itself, which is called Maeetis and is the mother of the Pontus.
87. And when Darius had observed the Pontus, he sailed back to the bridge, of which the architect was Mandrocles the Samian. And having observed also the Bosporus, he set up two pillars there of white stone, engraving letters on one in Assyrian and on the other in Greek, all the nations as many as he led; and he led all of which he was ruler. Of these, seventy myriads were numbered, apart from the naval force, with horsemen, and six hundred ships were collected. Now the Byzantines, having carried these pillars to the city later than these events, used them for the altar of Orthosian Artemis, except for one stone: this was left beside the temple of Dionysus in Byzantium, full of Assyrian letters. And the place of the Bosporus which King Darius bridged, as it seems to me having calculated, is in the middle between Byzantium and the temple at the entrance.
88. After these things, Darius, being pleased with the bridge, rewarded its architect Mandrocles the Samian with ten of everything. From these, indeed, Mandrocles, having painted a representation of the entire joining of the Bosporus and King Darius sitting in the front seat and his army crossing, dedicated these things to the temple of Hera, inscribing the following: "Having bridged the fish-abounding Bosporus, Mandrocles dedicated this memorial of the floating bridge to Hera, placing a crown around himself and glory for the Samians, having accomplished the will of King Darius."
89. These things, indeed, became a memorial of the one who built the bridge. And Darius, having rewarded Mandrocles, crossed over to Europe, instructing the Ionians to sail into the Pontus as far as the Ister River, and when they arrived at the Ister, to wait for him there, having built a bridge across the river. For the naval force was led by Ionians, Aeolians, and men from the Hellespont. The naval army, having sailed through the Dark Rocks, sailed straight to the Ister, and having sailed up the river for two days' journey from the sea, they built a bridge at the neck of the river, where the mouths of the Ister divide. And Darius, as he crossed the Bosporus by the floating bridge, traveled through Thrace, and having arrived at the source of the Tearus River, he set up camp for three days.
90. The Tearus is said by the inhabitants around to be the best of rivers for healing, both in other respects and especially for healing the skin diseases of men and horses. There are springs of it, thirty-eight in number, flowing from the same rock, some of which are cold and some hot. There is an equal road to them from the town of Heraeum by Perinthus and from Apollonia on the Euxine Sea, each of two days' journey. This Tearus flows into the Contadesdus River, and the Contadesdus into the Agrianes, and the Agrianes into the Hebrus, and the Hebrus into the sea by the city of Aenus.
91. Upon reaching this river, then, Darius, when he had encamped, being pleased with the river, set up a pillar there and in that place, having inscribed letters saying these things: "The heads of the Tearus River provide the best and most beautiful water of all rivers; and to them came, driving an army against the Scythians, a man who is the best and most beautiful of all men, Darius, the son of Hystaspes, the king of the Persians and of the whole continent." And these things were written there.
92. Darius, then, setting out from there, arrived at another river, which is named Artescus, and it flows through the land of the Odrysae. Upon arriving at this river, he did the following: having designated a place for the army, he ordered every man to place one stone as they passed by into this designated place. And when the army had accomplished this, he led the army away, leaving behind large piles of stones in that place.
93. Before arriving at the Ister River, Darius first captured the Getae who claimed immortality. For the Thracians who inhabited Salmydessus and the region above the cities of Apollonia and Mesambria, called Cyrmianae and Nipsaei, they surrendered themselves to Darius without a fight. But the Getae, turning to recklessness, were immediately enslaved, being the bravest and most just of the Thracians.
94. They believe in immortality in this way: they do not think that they themselves die, but rather that the one who perishes goes to be with Salmoxis, a divine being. Some of them call this same being Gebeleïzis. Every five years, they always send a messenger to Salmoxis, chosen by lot from among themselves, to inform him of whatever they need at that time. They send him in this manner: some of them are appointed to hold three spears, while others, taking hold of the hands and feet of the one being sent to Salmoxis, swing and throw him up onto the spears. If he dies from being impaled, they think that the god is pleased with them; but if he does not die, they blame the messenger himself, saying that he is a bad man, and after blaming him, they send another one. They give the message to him while he is still alive. These same Thracians also shoot arrows upward at the sky during thunder and lightning, threatening the god, and they believe in no other god except their own.
95. As I learn from the Greeks who inhabit the Hellespont and Pontus, this Salmoxis was a man who was once a slave in Samos, and he was a slave to Pythagoras, the son of Mnesarchus; then, having become free, he acquired great wealth and went away to his own country. Since the Thracians were living poorly and were looked down upon, this Salmoxis, knowing a way of life and customs deeper than those of the Thracians, having associated with Greeks and not with the least wise of the Greeks, Pythagoras, built a hall, in which he received the leading men of the city and entertained them sumptuously, teaching them that neither he nor his guests nor any of their descendants would ever die, but that they would go to a place where they would live forever and have all good things. While he was doing the things that have been mentioned and was saying these things, he was building an underground dwelling. When this dwelling was completely finished, he disappeared from the sight of the Thracians and went down to the underground dwelling and lived there for three years; and they longed for him and mourned him as dead. In the fourth year, he appeared to the Thracians, and thus they believed the things that Salmoxis said. They say that he did these things.
96. But concerning this matter and the underground dwelling, I neither disbelieve completely nor trust too much; I think, however, that this Salmoxis existed many years before Pythagoras. And whether there was some man named Salmoxis, or he is a local deity of the Getae, let it be so. These people, in such a manner, having been subdued by the Persians, followed the rest of the army.
97. And when Darius arrived and the infantry army with him at the Ister, having crossed over, Darius commanded the Ionians to break the bridge and follow him on the mainland with the army from the ships. And as the Ionians were about to break and do the things commanded, Coes, the son of Erxander, being a general of the Mytilenaeans, spoke these things to Darius, having first inquired whether it would be pleasing for him to accept advice from the one wishing to show it. "O king, for you are about to make a campaign upon a land where neither any cultivated land will appear nor any inhabited city: now let this bridge stand in its place, leaving these men as its guards who joined it. And if we do according to our intention, finding the Scythians, there is a way of return for us, and if we are not able to find them, at least the way of return is safe for us: for I do not fear at all that we may be worsted by the Scythians in battle, but rather that we may not be able to find them and suffer something wandering about. And one might say that I speak these things for my own sake, as I am remaining behind: but I bring forward to the middle the best advice I find for you, O king, and yet I myself will follow you and would not be left behind." And Darius was very pleased with the advice and answered him with these things: "Foreigner of Lesbos, when I have returned safely back to my house, appear to me without fail, so that I may repay you with good deeds for good advice."
98. Having said these things, and having made sixty knots in a leather strip, Darius called the Ionian tyrants to a meeting and spoke these words: "Men of Ionia, let my former decision concerning the bridge be changed; and taking this strip, do as follows: As soon as you see me setting out against the Scythians, beginning from that time, untie one knot each day. If the days marked by the knots have passed and I have not returned, then sail back to your own lands. But until then, since the plan has changed, guard the bridge, providing all eagerness for both safety and watchfulness. By doing these things, you will greatly please me." Having said these things, Darius hastened forward.
99. Of the Scythian land, Thrace lies towards the sea; and of this land, a gulf is formed, and the Scythian land and the Ister River flow into it, with the mouth turned towards the east wind. And from the Ister, I will describe the sea-coast of this Scythian land in measurement. From the Ister, this is already the ancient Scythia, lying towards the south wind and the midday, as far as the city called Carcinitis. And from this, the same coast, being mountainous and lying towards the Pontus, is inhabited by the Tauric nation as far as the Rough Peninsula called; and this lies towards the sea, towards the west wind. For there are two parts of the Scythian mountains lying towards the sea, both towards the south wind and towards the dawn, just as of the Attic land; and similar to this, the Tauri inhabit the Scythian land, as if another nation and not Athenians inhabited the ridge called Sunium, rather extending the end towards the sea, from Thoricus as far as the Anaphlystus district: I say that these are small to compare with great things: such is the Tauric land. But whoever has not sailed along this part of Attica, I will show it in another way: as if another nation and not Iapyges, beginning from the harbor of Brundisium, cut off as far as Tarentum and inhabited the end. And saying these two things, I say many similar things, to which the Tauric land is like.
100. From the Tauric region, the Scythians inhabit the land below the Tauri and the land towards the eastern sea, from the Cimmerian Bosporus towards the west and the Maeetian lake up to the Tanaïs river, which flows into the recess of this lake. Now, from the Ister, the land below towards the inland is called Scythian, first by the Agathyrsi, then by the Neuri, after that by the Man-eaters, and lastly by the Black-cloaks.
101. So, as Scythia is in the shape of a square, with two of its sides extending to the sea, both the part leading to the inland and the part along the sea are equal in all respects. For from the Ister to the Borysthenes is a journey of ten days, and from the Borysthenes to the Maeetian lake is another ten days; and from the sea to the inland, to the Black-cloaks who dwell above the Scythians, is a journey of twenty days. Now, I reckon a day's journey to be two hundred stades. Thus, the sides of Scythia that are parallel would be four thousand stades, and the sides that lead to the inland would be as many stades. This land, then, is of such a size.
102. The Scythians, giving reason to themselves that they were not able to drive away Darius' army in a straight battle alone, sent messengers to the neighboring countries. And indeed, the kings of these countries, having come together, were deliberating as a great army was advancing. The kings who had gathered were of the Tauri, Agathyrsi, Neuri, Maneaters, Black-cloaks, Geloni, Budini, and Sauromatae.
103. These Tauri indeed use such customs: they sacrifice to the Virgin both the shipwrecked and those Greeks whom they capture, brought back in this manner: having begun, they strike the head with a club. Some indeed say that they push the body from the cliff below (for the temple is established upon a cliff), and they crucify the head: others agree about the head, but they say that the body is not pushed from the cliff but rather is hidden in the earth. And they say that this goddess to whom they sacrifice is Iphigenia, the daughter of Agamemnon. And they make these men, whom they capture in war, as follows: having cut off each head, they carry it away to their houses, then having raised it upon a large piece of wood, they set it up above the house, greatly elevated, especially above the smoke vent. And they say that these are the guardians of the whole house, suspended in the air. And they live from plunder and war.
104. The Agathyrsi are indeed the most refined of men and greatly fond of gold, and they practice a shared intimacy with women, so that they may be brothers to one another and, being all related, may not be filled with envy or hatred towards each other. As for the other customs, they have adopted those of the Thracians.
105. The Neuri indeed use Scythian customs, but one generation before the invasion of Darius, they were overtaken by a need to abandon their entire land due to snakes. For their land produced many snakes, and even more fell upon them from the deserts above, so that being oppressed, they settled with the Budini, leaving their own land. These people are in danger of being sorcerers. For they are said by the Scythians and the Greeks who dwell in Scythia that once a year, each of the Neuri becomes a wolf for a few days, and then again returns to the same state. Now, these things they say do not persuade me, but they say them nonetheless, and even swear to it while speaking.
106. The Man-eaters, indeed, have the most savage customs of all people, neither recognizing justice nor using any law; they are nomads, wearing clothing similar to the Scythian, but having their own language, and they alone of these practice cannibalism.
107. The Black-cloaks, indeed, all wear black garments, upon which they have their names, and they use Scythian customs.
108. The Budini, indeed, being a large and numerous nation, are all mightily blue-eyed and red-haired. There is a wooden city in their territory, named Gelonus. The length of the wall of this city is each side thirty stadia, and it is high and all made of wood; and their houses are wooden, as well as their temples. For there are in it temples of Greek gods, furnished in Greek fashion with images, altars, and wooden shrines, and they celebrate Dionysus' festivals every three years and revel in them. The Geloni, indeed, are originally Greeks, who, having left the trading ports, settled among the Budini; and they use partly the Scythian language and partly the Greek language.
109. The Budini, indeed, do not use the same language nor have the same way of life as the Geloni. For the Budini, being indigenous, are nomads and alone of those in this region eat fir-cones; but the Geloni are workers of the land and eaters of grain and have gardens, not at all similar in appearance nor in color. Yet, by the Greeks, both the Budini and the Geloni are called, not rightly being called so. The whole land of them is all wooded with various kinds of trees: and in the greatest part of this land, there is a large lake and many marshes and reeds around it. In this area, they catch otters and beavers and other four-sided faced creatures, whose skins are sewn together along the edges, and their testicles are useful for the healing of the womb.
110. The account of the Sauromatae is told thus: When the Greeks fought against the Amazons (whom the Scythians call Oiorpata, which can be translated in the Greek language as "man-slayers": for they call a man oior, and pata means to kill), at that time, it is said that the Greeks, having won the battle on the Thermodon, sailed away carrying as many of the Amazons as they could capture alive. But the Amazons, while at sea, attacked and killed the men. The Amazons, however, did not know how to use ships, nor how to use rudders, sails, or oars; but after they had killed the men, they were carried along by the waves and the wind, and they arrived at the lake of Maeetis, at the Cliffs: and the Cliffs are in the land of the free Scythians. There, the Amazons disembarked from the ships and journeyed towards the inhabited land. And encountering first a horse-herding area, they seized it, and riding upon these horses, they raided the lands of the Scythians.
111. The Scythians, however, could not comprehend the matter: for they neither recognized the language, nor the clothing, nor the nation, but were in wonder from where they had come, and they thought them to be men of the same age, and indeed they made war against them. But from the battle, the Scythians prevailed over the dead, and thus they knew them to be women. So when they deliberated among themselves, it seemed best to them in no way to kill them any longer, but to send their youngest men to them, having guessed the number as many as they were, and to have these men encamp near them and do whatever they also might do. And if they pursued them, not to fight, but to retreat; and when they stopped, to come again and encamp near them. These things the Scythians planned, desiring to have children born from them. And the young men, having been sent, did the things that were commanded.
112. And when the Amazons learned that the young men came for no harm, they let them be at ease: and they drew the camp nearer to the camp each day. And the young men had nothing, just as the Amazons, except for the weapons and the horses, but they lived the same life as those women, hunting and gathering.
113. And the Amazons did this at midday: they would scatter one by one or in pairs, going far away from each other for more comfort. And the Scythians, having learned this, did the same thing. And when one of them was alone, a young man approached her, and the Amazon did not push him away but allowed him to have his way. And she could not speak, for they did not understand each other, but with her hand, she indicated to come to the same place the next day and bring another, signifying that there would be two and she would bring another as well. And the young man, when he had left, told these things to the others: and on the second day, he came to the place, both he and another, and they found the Amazon waiting with another woman. And the other young men, when they learned these things, also began to have relationships with the rest of the Amazons.
114. After the two camps had mingled, they lived together, each man having the woman with whom he had first had intercourse. The men could not learn the language of the women, but the women learned the language of the men. When they understood each other, the men said to the Amazons these things: "We have parents and possessions; now, let us no longer live in this way, but let us go to the multitude and live there. We will have you as wives and no others." The women replied to this, saying: "We could not live with your women, for our customs are not the same as theirs. We shoot with bows and throw javelins and ride horses, but we have not learned women's work; your women, on the other hand, do none of the things we have mentioned, but work on women's tasks, staying in the wagons, neither going hunting nor anywhere else. Therefore, we could not get along with them. But if you want to have us as wives and think it is right, go to your parents, receive your share of the possessions, and then come and live with us on our own." The young men were persuaded and did these things.
115. After they had received their share of the possessions and came back to the Amazons, the women spoke to them these things: "We have fear and dread about how we should live in this land, on the one hand having deprived you of your fathers, and on the other hand having caused much harm to your land. But since you deem us worthy to have as wives, do these things together with us: let us leave this land and, having crossed the Tanaïs river, let us settle there."
116. The young men were persuaded by these things as well, and having crossed the Tanaïs river, they journeyed towards the rising sun for three days from the Tanaïs road, and for three days from the Maeetis lake towards the north wind. Arriving in this region where they now dwell, they settled in it. And from that time on, the women of the Sauromatae have been using the ancient way of life, going out hunting on horses together with the men and separately from the men, going to war, and wearing the same attire as the men.
117. In terms of speech, the Sauromatae use a Scythian language, deviating from the original, since the Amazons did not learn it well. As for their marriage customs, they are as follows: no virgin marries until she kills a man from the enemy; some of them even grow old or die before getting married, being unable to fulfill this law.
118. Upon these mentioned nations' kings being gathered, the messengers of the Scythians arrived, explaining that the Persian, after all things in the other continent had been overthrown, having yoked a bridge upon the neck of the Bosporus, had crossed over to this continent; and having crossed and overthrown the Thracians, he bridged the Ister river, desiring to make all these things subject to himself. "You, therefore, in no way sitting out of the midst, should look on us being destroyed, but having thought the same, let us oppose the one coming. Will you not do these things? We, being oppressed, will either leave the land or, remaining, will make use of agreement. For what will we suffer, not desiring you to take vengeance? For you, there will be nothing lighter upon this. For the Persian comes no more for us than also for you, nor will he, having overthrown us, abstain from you. We will speak a great testimony to you of these words. For if the Persian were leading an army against us alone, desiring to exact vengeance for the former slavery, it was necessary for him, abstaining from all the others, to go thus upon our land, and it would be clear to all that he drives against the Scythians and not against the others. Now, however, as soon as possible, having crossed over to this continent, he subdues all those always becoming an obstacle: both indeed the other Thracians under himself and also the Getae, being our neighbors."
119. Upon hearing the Scythians' plea, the kings who had come from the various nations deliberated, and their opinions were divided: for indeed the Gelonian, the Budinian, and the Sauromatian, having become of the same mind, undertook to avenge the Scythians, but the Agathyrsian, the Neurian, the Androphagian, and those of the Melanchlaenians and Taurians responded thus to the Scythians: "If indeed you had not been the first to wrong the Persians and to begin the war, it would seem right for us to say these things, and we, having obeyed, would have done the same as you. But now, you, having invaded their land without us, ruled over the Persians for as long a time as the god granted you, and they, since the same god rouses them, give you the like. We, however, neither wronged these men at that time nor will we first attempt to wrong them now. But if they come and begin to wrong our land, we will not be persuaded; until we see this, however, we will remain with ourselves: for we think that the Persians are coming not against us but against those who were the cause of the wrongdoing."
120. When the Scythians learned of this response, they resolved not to engage in any open battle, since these allies were not joining them, but to retreat and drive out the wells that they themselves and the springs would mix, and to rub the grass out of the earth, dividing them in two. And for one of the divisions, which Scopasis ruled, the Sauromatae were to join: these indeed were to lead, if the Persian turned to this, straight to the Tanais river by the Maeetian lake, retreating, and to pursue when the Persian advanced. This was one division of the kingdom for them, arranged on this path which has been mentioned: the other two of the kingdoms, the great one which Idanthyrsus ruled and the third which Taxakis ruled, having come together and with the Geloni and Budini joining, to lead these one day's journey ahead of the Persians, retreating and doing the things resolved: first indeed to lead them straight to the lands of those who had refused their alliance, so that they might also make war on these: for if they did not willingly enter the war against the Persians, they would make war on them unwillingly: and after this to turn back to their own land and to undertake, if indeed it seemed good to those who resolved.
121. Having decided on this plan, the Scythians sent their best horsemen as an advance guard to confront Darius' army. The wagons in which their children and wives lived, they sent all of them, along with all their livestock, except for as much as was sufficient for them for food, leaving behind only that much. They instructed them to always drive towards the north.
122. These things indeed were sent ahead. And the advance guard of the Scythians, when they found the Persians about three days' journey away from the Ister, these men, finding them, being a day's journey ahead, encamped, destroying the things growing from the earth. And the Persians, when they saw the horse of the Scythians appearing, went always in the track of those retreating. And then (for they went straight towards one of the divisions) the Persians pursued towards the dawn and straight to the Tanaïs. And when these men crossed the Tanaïs river, the Persians, crossing over, pursued, until, having gone through the land of the Sauromatae, they arrived in the territory of the Budini.
123. As long as the Persians indeed were going through the Scythian and the Sauromatae lands, there was nothing for them to damage, as the land was dry and empty. But when they entered the territory of the Budini, there they encountered the wooden wall, having been abandoned by the Budini and emptied of all people, they burned it. Having done this, they always followed the path ahead, and having gone through this, they arrived at the desolate area. This desolate area is inhabited by no men and lies above the Budini territory, being a journey of seven days in length. Above this desolate land, the Thyssagetae dwell, and four large rivers flow from them through the Maeetian territory and empty into the lake called Maeetis, and these rivers have the following names: Lycus, Oarus, Tanaïs, and Syrgis.
124. When, therefore, Darius came to the desolate area, having ceased from the pursuit, he established his army by the river Oarus. And having done this, he built eight large walls, equal in distance from one another, about sixty stadia at most: the ruins of which were still in good condition in my time. While he was turning to these things, the pursued Scythians, having gone around the area below, returned to Scythia. And when they had completely disappeared, as they no longer appeared to them, thus indeed Darius left those half-finished walls, and he himself, having turned back, went towards the west, thinking that all these Scythians were there and that they were fleeing towards the west.
125. Driving his army at the fastest pace towards Scythia, Darius encountered both divisions of the Scythians, and pursuing them, they retreated a day's journey away. For Darius, not ceasing to advance, the Scythians fled according to their plan towards the lands of those who had refused their alliance, first to the land of the Black-cloaks. And when the Scythians and Persians invaded and disturbed these people, the Scythians led them into the lands of the Man-eaters; and when these too were disturbed, they went on to the land of the Neuri; and when these were also disturbed, the Scythians fled to the Agathyrsi. The Agathyrsi, seeing their neighbors fleeing and disturbed by the Scythians, sent a herald to forbid the Scythians to cross their borders, warning that if they tried to invade, they would fight them first. Having said this, the Agathyrsi came to help at the borders, intending to stop the invaders; but the Black-cloaks, Man-eaters, and Neuri, when invaded by the Persians together with the Scythians, neither turned to defense nor forgot the threat, but always fled towards the north into the desolate land, being disturbed. The Scythians, however, no longer went to the Agathyrsi who had refused them, but from the land of the Neuri they returned to their own land with the Persians.
126. As this went on for a long time and did not cease, Darius sent a horseman to the Scythian king Idanthyrsus, saying these things: "O strange man, why do you always flee, when it is possible for you to do other things? For if you think yourself worthy to oppose my affairs, then stop and, ceasing your wandering, fight. But if you recognize yourself to be weaker, then stop even so from running, and come to terms, bringing gifts of earth and water to your master."
127. In response to this, the Scythian king Idanthyrsus says the following: "Thus is my situation, O Persian. I have never fled from any man out of fear, neither before nor now do I flee from you, nor have I done anything different now than what I was accustomed to do even in times of peace. But as to why I do not immediately fight with you, I will also explain this. We have neither cities nor cultivated land, fearing for which we might sooner join you in battle. But if it is absolutely necessary to come to this quickly, we have ancestral tombs: come, find these and attempt to disturb them, and then you will know whether we will fight for the tombs or not. But before that, unless reason compels us, we will not join battle with you. Let this much be said concerning fighting; as for my masters, I consider only Zeus to be my ancestor and Hestia, the queen of the Scythians, to be the only ones. But for you, instead of gifts of earth and water, I will send such gifts as are fitting for you to receive, and instead of your claim to be my master, I say, 'Weep!'" This is the speech from the Scythians.
128. The herald indeed went away to deliver these things to Darius, but the Scythian kings, having heard the name of slavery, were filled with anger. They sent the division with the Sauromatae, which Scopasis commanded, to the Ionians, ordering them to come to a conference, those who were guarding the Ister bridge. But for those left behind, it seemed good to no longer deceive the Persians, but to attack them each time they were taking away food. Watching for when they were taking away food, the Scythians carried out their plan. The Scythian horse always turned the Persian horse, and the Persian horsemen, fleeing, fell upon the infantry, and the infantry would come to their aid. But the Scythians, having driven back the horse, would turn back, fearing the infantry. The Scythians also carried out similar attacks during the nights.
129. But for the Persians, it was an ally, and for the Scythians, it was an obstacle when they attacked Darius' camp, a great marvel, I will say, both the voice of the donkeys and the appearance of the mules. For neither donkey nor mule does the Scythian land bear, as has been shown to me before, nor is there in all Scythian land at all either donkey or mule because of the cold. The donkeys, in their insolence, disturbed the horses of the Scythians. Often, when they were driving against the Persians, as soon as the horses would hear the voice of the donkeys, they would be disturbed, turning back, and they would be in a marvel, standing straight with their ears, as neither having heard such a voice before nor having seen the appearance.
130. These things, indeed, for a short time, brought about a small part of the war. But the Scythians, as they saw the Persians in confusion, in order that they might remain for a longer time in Scythia and, remaining, be in want of everything, being in need, they did such things as these: as they would leave behind some of their own sheep with the shepherds, they themselves would drive off to another place. And the Persians, coming upon them, would seize the sheep and, having seized them, would be encouraged by what had been done.
131. And often such things happening, finally Darius was in confusion, and the Scythian kings, having learned this, sent a herald bearing gifts to Darius: a bird, a mouse, a frog, and five arrows. The Persians asked the bearer of the gifts the intention of the givers. But he said nothing, except that he was instructed to deliver the gifts and leave as quickly as possible. And he advised the Persians themselves, if they are wise, to understand what the gifts intended to say.
132. Upon hearing this, the Persians deliberated. Now indeed, the opinion of Darius was that the Scythians were giving themselves, their land, and their water to him, guessing thus: that the mouse is born on land, eating the same crop as humans, the frog in water, and the bird is most similar to a horse; and the arrows, as they give up their own strength. This opinion had been accepted by Darius. But there was present this opinion of Gobryas, one of the seven men who had killed the Magus, guessing that the gifts say, "Unless you Persians, becoming birds, fly up to the sky, or becoming mice, dive down into the earth, or becoming frogs, leap into the lakes, you will not return back, being struck by these arrows."
133. The Persians indeed discussed the gifts. But one part of the Scythians, which was assigned earlier to guard the Maeetian lake, then went to the Ister River to speak with the Ionians, saying these things as they arrived at the bridge: "Men of Ionia, we have come bringing freedom to you, if indeed you are willing to listen. For we learn that Darius has ordered you to guard the bridge alone for sixty days, and if he does not arrive within this time, to be released to your own land. Now, by doing these things, you will be free from blame both towards him and towards us: having remained for the appointed days, after that, be released." These things, then, the Ionians, having agreed to do, quickly hurried back.
134. To the Persians, after the gifts had come, the remaining Scythians were arrayed against Darius with foot soldiers and horsemen as if to engage in battle. But as the Scythians were arrayed, a rabbit ran out into the middle. And each of them, as they saw the rabbit, pursued it. And when the Scythians were disturbed and raised a clamor, Darius asked about the noise of the adversaries. And having learned that they were pursuing the rabbit, he said to those who were accustomed to speak with him, "These men despise us greatly, and now it seems to me that Gobryas spoke rightly about the Scythian gifts. Therefore, since it now seems so to me as well, we need good counsel, so that our return will be safe." In response to this, Gobryas said, "O King, I almost knew by word the difficulty of these men, but having come, I learned more, seeing them making sport of us. Now, therefore, it seems to me that as soon as night comes, having kindled the fires as we were accustomed to do, and having deceived the weakest of the soldiers into hardships and having bound all the donkeys, we should depart before the Scythians go straight to the Ister to break the bridge, or some thought occurs to the Ionians by which they will be able to accomplish something against us."
135. Gobryas indeed advised this, and after night came, Darius made use of this plan: he left behind the exhausted men, of whom there was the least account, and all the donkeys, having bound them in the camp. He left behind both the donkeys and the weak of the army for these reasons, so that the donkeys might provide noise, and the men were left behind on account of their weakness, but with this pretext, that he himself intended to attack the Scythians with the pure part of the army, while they would guard the camp during this time. Having given these orders to those left behind, Darius set fire to the campfires and hastened towards the Ister. The donkeys, having been deserted by the company, indeed brayed much more loudly; and the Scythians, having heard the donkeys, hoped throughout the land that the Persians were there.
136. When day came, the men left behind realized that they had been betrayed by Darius, and they stretched out their hands to the Scythians and told them what had happened. The Scythians, upon hearing this, quickly gathered their forces, both the two divisions of the Scythians and the one division with the Sauromatae, Budini, and Geloni, and pursued the Persians straight to the Ister. Since the Persian army was mostly made up of foot soldiers and did not know the unmarked roads, while the Scythian army was made up of horsemen and knew the shortcuts, they missed each other. The Scythians arrived at the bridge much earlier than the Persians. When they learned that the Persians had not yet arrived, they spoke to the Ionians who were in their ships: "Men of Ionia, the days of the agreement have passed, and you should not stay here any longer. But since you stayed here earlier out of fear, now break the bridge as quickly as possible and go away, rejoicing as free men, knowing gratitude to both the gods and the Scythians. We will deal with the one who was your master before in such a way that he will never lead an army against any men again."
137. In response to this, the Ionians deliberated. Miltiades, the Athenian, who was both a general and a tyrant of the Chersonesites in the Hellespont, had the opinion to obey the Scythians and to liberate Ionia. However, Histiaeus of Miletus had an opposing view, saying that now, indeed, through Darius each of them rules a city: but with the power of Darius being overthrown, neither he himself would be able to rule Miletus nor any other of them anywhere: for each of the cities would desire to be ruled democratically rather than by a tyrant. As Histiaeus demonstrated this opinion, immediately all were turned towards this view, previously having chosen the opinion of Miltiades.
138. These were the ones who both differed in their vote and were in favor of the king: the tyrants of the Hellespont were Daphnis of Abydos, Hippoclus of Lampsacus, Herophantus of Parium, Metrodorus of Proconnesus, Aristagoras of Cyzicus, and Ariston of Byzantium. These were the ones from the Hellespont, and from Ionia were Strattis of Chios, Aiaces of Samos, Laodamas of Phocaea, and Histiaeus of Miletus, whose opinion was the one opposed to that of Miltiades. Among the Aeolians, the only notable person present was Aristagoras of Cymae.
139. So when they agreed with Histiaeus' opinion, they decided to add these deeds and words to it: to break the part of the bridge that was on the Scythian side, and to break it as far as a bowshot reaches, so that they might seem to be doing something while doing nothing, and the Scythians would not attempt to cross the Ister River by the bridge, wanting to survive; and to say, while breaking the part of the bridge that was on the Scythian side, that they would do everything that was pleasing to the Scythians. They added this to the plan. Then Histiaeus answered on behalf of everyone, saying, "Men of Scythia, you have come bringing good things and at the right time, hurry: and both what is from you to us is well-guided, and what is from us to you is willingly served. For as you see, we are breaking the passage, and we will have all eagerness, wanting to be free. While we are breaking this, it is time for you to seek those men, and having found them, to take vengeance on them for both us and yourselves, as it is fitting for them."
140. Trusting the words of the Ionians for the second time, the Scythians returned to the search for the Persians, and they missed all of their enemies' passage. The Scythians themselves became the cause of this, having destroyed the pastures of the horses in that region and having blocked the waters. For if they had not done these things, it would have been easy for them, if they wanted, to find the Persians. Now, however, they thought they had planned the best course of action, but they were led astray by it. Indeed, the Scythians, in their own land where there was food for the horses and water, searched for their enemies by passing through these areas, thinking that the Persians would also make their escape through such places. But the Persians, guarding their own previous path, went on, and thus with difficulty they found the crossing. And when they arrived at night and encountered the broken bridge, they came into great fear, lest the Ionians had left them behind.
141. There was around Darius a man, an Egyptian, having the loudest voice of all men. This man, standing on the edge of the Ister River, Darius ordered to call out to Histiaeus the Milesian. Indeed, he did these things, and Histiaeus, having heard the first command, provided all the ships to ferry the army across and he joined the bridge.
142. Thus, the Persians indeed escaped, and the Scythians, seeking and missing the Persians for the second time, judged the Ionians to be the worst and most cowardly of all men, considering them as free men; but, considering them as slaves, they said they were the most servile and least desirous of freedom. Indeed, these things were thrown at the Ionians by the Scythians.
143. Darius, journeying through Thrace, arrived at Sestos of the Chersonesus. From there, he himself crossed over to Asia with the ships, but left behind a commander in Europe, Megabazus, a Persian man. To him, Darius once gave an honor, saying such a word among the Persians. As Darius was about to eat pomegranate seeds, when he opened the first of the pomegranates, his brother Artabanus asked him what he would wish for, to have as many of as the seeds in the pomegranate. Darius then said he would rather have as many men like Megabazus than to have Hellas subjected. Indeed, in saying this among the Persians, he honored him. But then, he left him as the commander, having eighty thousand of his own army.
144. This Megabazus, having said this word, left an immortal memory among the people of the Hellespont. For when he was in Byzantium, he learned that seventeen years earlier, the people of Calchedon had founded their land before the Byzantines. Upon learning this, he said that the Calchedonians at that time must have been blind, for they would not have chosen to establish their land in a worse place when a better one was available, if they were not blind. So then, this Megabazus, having been left as the commander in the land of the Hellespont, was subduing those who did not support the Persians.
145. This one, indeed, now was doing these things. At the same time, another great expedition was being prepared against Libya, for the pretext which I will relate after having first told the following story. The children of the crew from the Argo, having been expelled by the Pelasgians who had kidnapped the Athenian women from Brauron, being driven out by them from Lemnos, sailed to Lacedaemon, and settling in Teügetum, they kindled a fire. The Lacedaemonians, seeing this, sent a messenger to inquire who they were and from where they came. They told the messenger, when he asked, that they were Minyae, the children of the heroes who had sailed in the Argo, and that these heroes had landed in Lemnos and had planted them there. The Lacedaemonians, having heard the story of the lineage of the Minyae, sent a second time to ask what they wanted, why they had come to their land, and why they had kindled a fire. They said that they had been expelled by the Pelasgians and had come to their fathers, for it was most just that this should happen. They needed to live together with these people, sharing a portion of their honors and having received a share of the land. The Lacedaemonians were pleased to receive the Minyae on the terms they themselves desired. The naval expedition in the Argo of the Tyndaridae especially urged them to do these things. Having received the Minyae, they gave them a share of the land and distributed them into tribes. They immediately married, and they arranged marriages for the women they had brought from Lemnos.
146. However, not much time passed before the Minyae became insolent, demanding a share in the kingship and committing other unholy acts. Therefore, the Lacedaemonians decided to kill them, and having captured them, they threw them into a prison. The Lacedaemonians kill whomever they kill at night, but no one during the day. So, when they were about to execute them, the wives of the Minyae, who were local women and daughters of the foremost Spartans, asked to enter the prison and to speak with each of their husbands. The Lacedaemonians allowed them, not thinking that there would be any deceit from them. When the women entered, they did the following: they gave all the clothes they were wearing to their husbands, and they themselves took the clothes of their husbands. The Minyae, putting on the women's clothing, went out as if they were women, and having escaped in such a manner, they settled again in Teügetum.
147. At the same time, Theras, son of Autesion, son of Tisamenus, son of Thersander, son of Polynices, was sending out a colony from Lacedaemon. This Theras, being of Cadmean lineage, was the maternal uncle of the sons of Aristodemus, Eurysthenes and Procles. While these children were still young, Theras held the royal power in Sparta as their guardian. But when the brothers grew up and took the rule, Theras, having become accustomed to being in power, found it hard to be ruled by others after he had tasted rule, and said that he would not stay in Lacedaemon but would sail away to his relatives. There were in the island now called Thera, but then Calliste, descendants of Membliarus, son of Poeciles, a Phoenician man. For Cadmus, son of Agenor, in seeking Europa, came to the island now called Thera; and either because the land pleased him, or for some other reason, he left in this island some of his Phoenicians, and among them his own kinsman Membliarus. These people lived on the island called Calliste for eight generations before Theras came from Lacedaemon.
148. So then, Theras, leading a group of people from various tribes, was sending them to join these people on the island, intending to settle with them and by no means drive them out, but rather to treat them as his own people. And when the Minyae, having escaped from their confinement, settled on Teügetum, Theras, as the Lacedaemonians were planning to destroy them, pleaded that there be no bloodshed, and he himself undertook to lead them out of the country. And when the Lacedaemonians agreed to this plan, he sailed with three thirty-oared ships to the descendants of Membliarus, not taking all the Minyae but only a few. For most of them turned to the Paroreatae and Caucones, and having driven them out of the country, they divided themselves into six parts, and then they founded these cities in their own territories: Lepreum, Macistus, Phrixae, Pyrgus, Epium, and Nudium. And most of these were sacked by the Eleans in my time. And the island, because of its colonist Theras, received the name Thera.
149. However, the boy, for he said he would not sail with him, therefore he said he would leave him like a sheep among wolves. Upon this word, a name for this young man, Oeolycus, came to be, and somehow this name prevailed. And from Oeolycus is born Aegeus, upon whom the Aegidae are called a great tribe in Sparta. But for the men in this tribe, for the children did not endure, they established from the oracle a sanctuary of the avenging spirits of Laïus and Oedipus; and after this, they endured... the same thing also happened in Thera for those born from these men.
150. Up to this point in the story, the Lacedaemonians and the Theraeans agree with each other, but from here on, only the Theraeans say that it happened like this. Grinnus, the son of Aesanius, being a descendant of this Theras and king of the island of Thera, came to Delphi, bringing a hecatomb from the city. With him also went other citizens, and indeed also Battus, the son of Polymnestus, being a descendant of Euphemus of the Minyans. When Grinnus, the king of the Theraeans, consulted the oracle about other matters, the Pythia commanded him to found a city in Libya. He replied, saying, "I, lord, am already old and heavy to move; you should command one of these younger men to do this." And as he said this, he pointed to Battus. At that time, that was all. But after they left, they disregarded the oracle, neither knowing where Libya was on earth nor daring to send a colony to an unknown matter.
151. Seven years after this, there was no rain in Thera, and all the trees in the island withered except for one. The Pythia, when consulted by the Theraeans, brought up the matter of the colony in Libya. Since they had no other remedy for their troubles, they sent messengers to Crete to inquire if any of the Cretans or their settlers had ever gone to Libya. These messengers, wandering around, arrived at the city of Itanus, where they encountered a murex fisherman named Corobius, who said that he had been carried away by winds and had come to Libya and the island of Platea in Libya. They persuaded him with payment to go to Thera, and from Thera they sailed as scouts, at first not many men. When Corobius led them to this island of Platea, they left him there, providing him with enough food for a certain number of months, and they themselves sailed back as quickly as possible to report to the Theraeans about the island.
152. But when these men were away for a longer time than the agreed upon, Corobius ran out of everything, and after this, a Samian ship, of which Colaeus was the ship-owner, sailing to Egypt, was carried away to this Platea. And the Samians, learning the whole story from Corobius, left him a year's supply of food. And they themselves, setting sail from the island and trying to reach Egypt, were carried away by an easterly wind; for the wind did not let up, and passing through the Pillars of Heracles, they arrived at Tartessus, using divine guidance. And this market was untapped at this time, so that these men, returning home, made the greatest profit of all the Greeks we know of with certainty, except for Sostratus, son of Laodamas, an Aeginetan; for no one can compete with him. And the Samians, taking out a tenth of their profits, made a bronze vessel in the Argolic manner, and around it are griffin heads projecting. And they dedicated it in the temple of Hera, having set it up on three bronze colossal figures, each twelve feet high and kneeling. And from this deed, great friendships were established between the Cyrenaeans and Theraeans and the Samians.
153. And when the Theraeans, having left Corobius on the island, arrived back in Thera, they reported that there was an island established near Libya for them. And it pleased the Theraeans to send one brother from each pair by drawing lots, and from all the seven regions, men, and for them to have a leader and king, Battus. Thus, they prepared two fifty-oared ships for Platea.
154. The Theraeans say these things, but the rest of the story already agrees with the Theraeans and Cyrenaeans. For the Cyrenaeans do not at all agree with the Theraeans about Battus, for they say thus: There is a city of Crete, Oaxus, in which Etearchus was king, who had an illegitimate daughter named Phronime, and he married another woman. And she, having come down, accused Phronime of being her stepmother and caused her evils, and she plotted everything against her, and finally, with her cunning, she persuaded her husband that things were so. And he, having been informed by his wife, plotted an unholy deed against his daughter. For there was indeed a man, Themison, a Theraean merchant in Oaxus. Etearchus, having taken him as a guest-friend, made him swear that he would serve him in whatever he might need. And when he had sworn, Etearchus handed over his daughter to him and ordered him to take her away and drown her. But Themison, having been deceived by the trick of the oath and having dissolved the guest-friendship, did the following: having taken the girl, he sailed away; and when he was in the open sea, he avoided the oath of Etearchus, and having bound her with ropes, he let her down into the sea, and having pulled her up, he arrived at Thera.
155. Thence, Phronime was taken by Polymnestus, a distinguished man of the Theraeans, and became his concubine. And as time went by, a son was born to her, who had a strong voice and stuttered, and his name was given as Battus, as the Theraeans and Cyrenaeans say, but as I think, something else: Battus was renamed, after he arrived in Libya, both from the oracle that happened to him in Delphi and from the honor he received, making the surname. For the Libyans call a king "Battus," and for this reason, I think the Pythia called him in the Libyan language, knowing that he will be a king in Libya. For when this man grew up, he came to Delphi about his voice: and when he asked, the Pythia responded to him thus. "Battus, you came for a voice. But Lord Phoebus Apollo sends you to Libya, a shepherd-founder," as if she would say in the Greek language, using 'O king, you came for a voice.' And he replied with these words. "Lord, I came to you to consult about my voice, but you tell me other impossible things, commanding me to colonize Libya with what power, with what hand?" Saying this, he did not persuade her to respond otherwise: and as she prophesied the same things to him as before, Battus left in the middle and went back to Thera.
156. But after this, things turned out badly for him and the other Theraeans. The Theraeans, not knowing the cause of their troubles, sent to Delphi concerning the present evils. The Pythia advised them that it would be better for them to help Battus found Cyrene in Libya. After this, the Theraeans sent Battus with two fifty-oared ships. Sailing to Libya, they did not know what else to do, so they returned to Thera. The Theraeans, however, shot arrows at them as they approached and did not allow them to land, but ordered them to sail back. So, being forced, they sailed back and founded an island lying off Libya, which, as was said before, is called Platea. The island is said to be equal in size to the city of Cyrene that now exists.
157. Living in that place for two years, for nothing good came together for them, leaving one of them behind, all the others sailed to Delphi; and arriving at the oracle, they consulted it, saying that they were living in Libya and were not doing any better living there. The Pythia responded to them with these words: "If you, knowing better than I, think that you know my Libya, the land of sheep, not having gone there, I am very amazed at your wisdom." Hearing these things, those around Battus sailed back; for the god did not let them go from the colony until they arrived in Libya itself. Arriving at the island and taking up the one left behind, they founded a place of Libya opposite the island, which was named Aziris; the most beautiful groves on both sides come together there, and a river flows along on one side.
158. They inhabited this region for six years, and in the seventh year, the Libyans, promising to lead them to a better place, persuaded them to leave. From there, the Libyans led them westward, and in order for the Greeks not to see the most beautiful of the lands as they passed through, they timed the journey so that they would pass through during the night. This place is called Irasa. Having brought them to a spring said to be of Apollo, they said, "Men of Greece, it is fitting for you to dwell here. For here, the sky is pierced."
159. During the reigns of Battus, the founder of the colony who ruled for forty years, and his son Arcesilaus who ruled for sixteen years, the Cyrenaeans, being as many as those who were initially sent to the colony, inhabited. But during the time of the third ruler, Battus called the Fortunate, the Pythian priestess urged all Greeks to sail to Libya, joining the Cyrenaeans: for the Cyrenaeans called for a distribution of land. The oracle declared thus: "Whoever comes later to the much-loved Libya, distributing lands, I say that he will care for a time." When a large group gathered in Cyrene, the neighboring Libyans and their king, whose name was Adikran, being deprived of much land and being insulted by the Cyrenaeans, sent themselves to Egypt and gave themselves to Apries, the king of Egypt. He, having gathered a large Egyptian army, sent it to Cyrene. The Cyrenaeans, having marched out to the region of Irasa and to the spring of Thestes, fought against the Egyptians and won the battle. For the Egyptians, having not been experienced with Greeks before and being unprepared, were so destroyed that only a few of them returned to Egypt. Instead of these Egyptians, blaming Apries for this, they rebelled against him.
160. Battus' son, Arcesilaus, came to be. He, first reigning, caused strife with his own brothers, to the point that they, leaving him, went to another region of Libya and, taking matters into their own hands, founded this city which then and now is called Barce; and while founding it, they caused the Libyans to distrust the Cyrenaeans. After Arcesilaus, he campaigned against the Libyans who had received and rebelled against these same people: the Libyans, fearing him, went fleeing to the eastern Libyans. Arcesilaus followed the fleeing ones, to the point that he, pursuing, came to be in Leucon of Libya and it seemed to the Libyans to attack him. Engaging in battle, they defeated the Cyrenaeans so much that seven thousand Cyrenaean hoplites fell there. After this wound, Arcesilaus, being weak and having taken a drug, his brother Learchus strangled him; and Learchus, Arcesilaus' wife cunningly killed, her name was Eryxo.
161. And the kingship of Arcesilaus was succeeded by the son of Battus, who was lame and not able to walk properly. The Cyrenaeans, in response to the misfortune that had befallen them, sent to Delphi to inquire in what manner, having established themselves, they might best dwell. The Pythia commanded them to bring a mediator from Mantinea of the Arcadians. So the Cyrenaeans asked, and the Mantineans gave them a man of their citizens, most esteemed, whose name was Demonax. This man, then, having come to Cyrene and having learned everything, made them into three tribes, dividing them in this way: one part he made of Theraeans and the neighboring people, another of Peloponnesians and Cretans, and a third of all the islanders. And to the king Battus, he assigned sacred lands and priesthoods, and all the other things that the kings had before, he placed in the middle for the people.
162. During the time of this Battus, things were thus, but during the time of his son Arcesilaus, there was much turmoil concerning the honors. For Arcesilaus, the son of Battus the lame and Pheretime, said he would not endure according to what the Mantinean Demonax arranged, but demanded the privileges of his ancestors. From there, he formed a faction and was defeated and fled to Samos, and his mother fled to Salamis of Cyprus. At that time, Evelthon ruled Salamis, who dedicated the incense burner in Delphi, which is a notable one and lies in the treasury of the Corinthians. Arriving at him, Pheretime asked for an army that would lead them back to Cyrene. Evelthon gave her everything rather than an army. She, receiving the given, said it was good and this was it, but that was better, to give her the needed army. For she said this to every given thing, and finally, Evelthon sent her a gift, a golden spindle and distaff, and wool was also added. And when Pheretime said the same words again, Evelthon said that such things were for giving to women, but not an army.
163. While Arcesilaus was at this time in Samos, he gathered every man upon the land by a new distribution: and as a great army was being collected, Arcesilaus was sent to Delphi to consult the oracle about his return. The Pythia gave him this response: "For four Battuses and four Arcesilauses, eight generations of men, Loxias grants you to rule Cyrene; but he advises not to attempt more than this. However, you may return to your own land and be at peace. If you find an oven full of amphorae, do not bake the amphorae but send them away by the wind: if you do bake the oven, do not enter the tidal place: if you do not die, both you and the most beautiful bull shall die." This was the Pythia's response to Arcesilaus.
164. Arcesilaus, having taken the men from Samos, went down to Cyrene and, having gained control of affairs, did not remember the oracle, but demanded justice from those who opposed him for his own exile. Some of them were completely driven out of the country, while Arcesilaus, having seized some, sent them to Cyprus for destruction. Now the Cnidians, having taken them away, saved them and sent them to Thera. But some other Cyrenaeans, having fled to a large tower of Aglomachus, Arcesilaus, having surrounded it with private wood, set it on fire. Having learned that this was the oracle's work, that the Pythia did not allow him to find the amphorae in the oven and bake them, he willingly left the city of the Cyrenaeans, fearing the prophesied death and thinking that Cyrene was a tidal place. He had a wife related to himself, the daughter of the king of the Barcaeans, whose name was Alazir. He came to him, and the men of Barce and some of the exiles from Cyrene, having discovered him while shopping, killed him, and also his father-in-law Alazir. Now Arcesilaus, whether willingly or unwillingly, having erred from the oracle, fulfilled his own fate.
165. And the mother Pheretime, while Arcesilaus was dwelling in Barce, having brought about evil for himself, she herself held the honors of her son in Cyrene, managing the other affairs and attending the council. But when she learned that her son had died in Barce, she fled and went to Egypt. For there were favors made by Arcesilaus to Cambyses, the son of Cyrus: for this was the Arcesilaus who gave Cyrene to Cambyses and arranged the tribute. And when Pheretime arrived in Egypt, she sat as a suppliant of Aryandes, asking him to avenge her, putting forth the pretext that her son had died because of the alliance with the Medes.
166. And this Aryandes was the governor of Egypt, having been appointed by Cambyses, who later, after these events, was destroyed for making himself equal to Darius. For having learned and seen that Darius desired to leave a memorial of himself, this which was not accomplished by any other king, he imitated him, for which he received the reward. For Darius indeed, having purified gold to the highest degree, minted it into coin, and Aryandes, ruling Egypt, did the same with silver, and now the silver is the purest, that of Aryandes. But when Darius learned that he was doing these things, having brought another charge against him, as if he were rebelling, he killed him.
167. Then indeed this Aryandes, having pitied Pheretime, gave her the entire army from Egypt, both the infantry and the navy: and he appointed as general of the infantry Amasis, a man of Maraphis, and of the navy Badres, being of the Pasargadae tribe by birth. But before sending the army, Aryandes, having sent a herald to Barce, inquired who was the killer of Arcesilaus. And the Barcaeans themselves all took responsibility: for they suffered many and great evils because of him. And learning these things, Aryandes thus sent the army along with Pheretime. Now this was the pretext for the expedition, but the army was sent, as it seems to me, for the overthrow of Libya. For indeed there are many and various tribes of Libyans, and few of them were subject to the king, but most of them cared nothing for Darius.
168. In Libya, the Adyrmachidae dwell as the first of the Libyans, beginning from Egypt. They mostly use Egyptian customs, but wear clothing similar to the other Libyans. Their women wear bronze twisted decorations around each of their legs; they let their hair grow long, and when they catch lice, each woman bites them and then throws them away. These people alone among the Libyans do this, and they alone present their virgins who are about to marry to the king. Whichever one pleases the king, he takes her virginity. These Adyrmachidae extend from Egypt up to a harbor which is called Plynus.
169. Next to these Adyrmachidae are the Giligamae, inhabiting the western region up to the island of Aphrodisias. And in the space between this territory and the island of Platea lies, which the Cyrenaeans founded, and on the mainland there is a harbor called Menelaus and Aziris, which the Cyrenaeans inhabit, and the silphium begins from this point: and it extends from the island of Platea up to the mouth of the Syrtis. These people use customs similar to the other ones.
170. But the Asbystae possess the land to the west of the Giligamae. These people dwell above Cyrene. However, the Asbystae do not reach the sea, for the land by the sea is occupied by the Cyrenaeans. And among the Libyans, they are not the least, but rather the most skilled in using four-horse chariots, and they practice to imitate most of the customs of the Cyrenaeans.
171. But the Auschisae possess the land to the west of the Asbystae: these people dwell above Barce, reaching the sea at Euhesperidae. And among the Auschisae, in the middle of their land, dwell the Bacales, a small tribe, reaching the sea at the city of Tauchira in the Barcaean region: and they use the same customs as those who live inland from Cyrene.
172. But of the Auschisae, the Nasamones possess the land to the west, being a populous nation, who in the summer, leaving their flocks by the sea, go up to the Augila region to gather the dates from the palm trees, which are abundant and bear much fruit. And they hunt locusts, which, having dried in the sun, they grind and mix with milk to drink. Each man has many wives, and they make their intercourse common in a manner similar to the Massagetae: when a man sets up a staff, they have intercourse. But first, when a Nasamonian man marries, it is the custom for the bride on the first night to go through all the guests, having intercourse: and each man, as he has intercourse with her, gives a gift, whatever he has brought from his house. And they use oaths and divination in this way: they swear by the men who are said to have been the most just and best among them, touching their tombs: and they practice divination by going to the tombs of their ancestors, and having prayed, they lie down to sleep: and whatever they see in the dream, they use this. And they use such pledges: one gives to drink from his hand, and he himself drinks from the hand of the other. But if they have no liquid, they take some dust from the ground and lick it.
173. But the Psylli are neighbors to the Nasamones. These people were destroyed in such a manner: the south wind blowing upon them dried up the waters, and their entire land, being within the Syrtis, was without water. And they, having deliberated in common, marched against the south (I say these things which the Libyans say), and when they came to be in the sand, the south wind blew and buried them. And with these being destroyed, the Nasamones possess their land.
174. Of these, indeed, to the south wind in the wild-beast-filled land, the Garamantes dwell, who flee from all men and all interaction, and neither do they possess any weapon for war nor do they know how to defend themselves.
175. These, indeed, dwell above the Nasamones: and by the sea, the Macae possess the land towards the west, who cut their hair into crests, allowing the middle of their hair to grow, and shaving the parts on either side, and in war, they wear shields made from the skins of ground birds. And through them, the Cinyps River flows from a hill called the Hill of the Graces into the sea. This hill, the Hill of the Graces, is dense with trees, while the rest of the previously mentioned Libya is bare: and from the sea to it, there are two hundred stadia.
176. Next to the Macae are the Gindanes, whose women each wear many leather anklets for such a reason, as it is said: for each man they have been intimate with, they wear an anklet. And the one who has the most is considered the best, as she has been loved by the most men.
177. A coast projecting into the sea is inhabited by these Gindanes, where the Lotus Eaters dwell, who feed only on the fruit of the lotus and live. The fruit of the lotus is as large as the fruit of the mastich-tree, and in sweetness it is similar to the fruit of the date-palm. The Lotus Eaters also make wine from this fruit.
178. But along the sea, the Machlyes dwell next to the Lotus Eaters, using the lotus fruit as well, yet less than those mentioned before, and they inhabit up to a great river, which is named Triton; and this river flows out into a large lake, Tritonis. And in this lake, there is an island, which is named Phla. And it is said that this island is an oracle for the Lacedaemonians to establish.
179. There is also this story told: When Jason, after the Argo was built for him at the foot of Pelion, put on it both a hecatomb and indeed a bronze tripod to sail around the Peloponnese, intending to arrive at Delphi. And as he was sailing by Malea, a north wind took hold of him and carried him away to Libya; before he could see land, he found himself among the rocks of the Tritonian lake. And as he was at a loss for a way out, it is said that Triton appeared to him and ordered Jason to give him the tripod, saying that they would receive a way out and be sent away unharmed. And when Jason was persuaded, Triton indeed showed them the passage through the rocks and placed the tripod in his own temple, having prophesied with the tripod and having indicated to those with Jason the whole story, that when one of the descendants of those sailing in the Argo should carry off the tripod, then it would be necessary for a hundred Greek cities to be inhabited around the Tritonian lake. Having heard this, the local Libyans hid the tripod.
180. Next to the Machlyes live the Auseans: these and the Machlyes dwell around the Tritonian lake, and the Triton river separates them. The Machlyes wear their hair long at the back of the head, while the Auseans wear it long in the front. At an annual festival of Athena, their maidens are divided into two groups and fight against each other with stones and sticks, saying that they are fulfilling the customs of their ancestral goddess, whom they call Athena. Those of the maidens who die from their wounds they call false virgins. Before they let them fight, they do this together: they adorn the most beautiful maiden of the time with a Corinthian dog and Greek armor and, having put her on a chariot, they lead her around the lake in a circle. As to how they used to adorn the maidens before the Greeks settled among them, I cannot say, but I think that they adorned them with Egyptian weapons: for I say that the shield and the helmet came from Egypt to the Greeks. They say that Athena is the daughter of Poseidon and the Tritonian lake, and that, having found fault with her father, she gave herself to Zeus, and Zeus made her his own daughter. They say these things, and they have a common intercourse with their women, neither living together like cattle nor mingling. But when a woman's child becomes strong, the men gather within three months, and the child is considered the son of the man in whose house it is.
181. These, then, are the coastal nomads of Libya that have been mentioned. Beyond these, towards the inland, is the wild-animal-filled Libya, and beyond this wild-animal-filled land lies a sandy ridge extending from the Theban Egyptians to the Pillars of Heracles. In this ridge, there is mostly salt, in large lumps, at intervals of ten days' journey, and at the top of each lump, cold and sweet water springs forth from the midst of the salt. Around this, people dwell at the edge of the desert and beyond the wild-animal-filled land, first from Thebes at a distance of ten days' journey, the Ammonians, who have a temple of the Theban Zeus; for indeed, the statue of Zeus in Thebes, as I have said before, has the face of a ram. They also happen to have another water source, a spring, which becomes warm in the morning, cooler as the market fills, and at midday, it is very cold; at this time, they water their gardens. As the day declines, the coldness abates, until the sun sets and the water becomes warm. Going further into the heat, it approaches midnight, and at this time, it boils and bubbles; the middle of the night passes, and it cools until dawn. This spring is called by the name of the Sun.
182. After the Ammonians, through the ridge of sand, through another ten days' journey, there is a salt hill similar to the Ammonian one, and water, and people dwell around it; the name of this place is Augila. To this place, the Nasamones, collecting palm fruit, go.
183. From Augila, through another ten days' journey, there is another salt hill and water and many fruit-bearing palms, just as in the other places; and people live there, whose name is Garamantes, a great nation, strongly, who sow on the salt earth. The shortest route to the Lotus Eaters is thirty days' journey to them: among them, the cattle with backward-facing horns are born: they are called backward-facing because of this. They have horns bent forward: for this reason, they retreat backward while grazing: for they are not able to move forward with their horns projecting into the ground. Apart from this, they do not differ from other cattle except for this and the thickness and toughness of their skin. These Garamantes hunt the cave-dwelling Ethiopians with four-horse chariots: for the cave-dwelling Ethiopians are the fastest runners of all the people we have heard of in our accounts. The cave-dwellers eat snakes and lizards and such reptiles: their language is not similar to any other, but they squeak like bats.
184. From the Garamantes, through another ten days' journey, there is another salt hill and water, and people live around it, whose name is Atarantes, who are nameless alone of the people we know: for they have the name Atarantes in common, but no name is given to each one of them. These people, when the sun is at its peak, curse and insult it with all the shameful words, because it scorches them and wears them down, both the people themselves and their land. After another ten days' journey, there is another salt hill and water, and people live around it. There is a mountain of salt called Atlas, which is narrow and round on all sides, and it is said to be so high that its peaks cannot be seen. For the clouds never leave them, neither in summer nor in winter. The locals say that this is the pillar of heaven. These people, who live on this mountain, became named after it: for they are indeed called Atlantes. They are said neither to eat any living thing nor to see dreams while sleeping.
185. Up to these Atlantes, indeed, I am able to list the names of those dwelling in the ridge, but from these, no longer. So then, the ridge extends up to the Pillars of Heracles and beyond them. And there is a salt mine in it, a ten days' journey away, and people living there. The houses for all these people are built from the salty lumps. For these parts of Libya are already without rain: for the walls, being salty, would not be able to remain if it rained. And the salt there is dug up, both white and purple in appearance. Moreover, beyond the ridge, the southern and inland parts of Libya are desolate and waterless and without wild animals and without rain and without wood; and there is no moisture in it.
186. Thus indeed, up to the Tritonian lake from Egypt, the Libyans are nomads who eat meat and drink milk, and not partaking of female cows, for the same reason as the Egyptians, and not raising pigs. Now, the women of Cyrene do not deem it right to eat female cows because of Isis in Egypt, but they also perform fasts and festivals for her. And the women of Barca do not partake of pigs along with the cows.
187. These things, indeed, are so. But to the west of the Tritonian lake, the Libyans are no longer nomads, nor do they use the same laws, nor do they treat their children in the same way as the nomads are accustomed to do. For the Libyan nomads, if not all, I cannot say for certain, many of them do this: when their children are four years old, they burn the veins on the tops of their heads with the fat of sheep, and others of them on their temples, for the purpose that they may not be troubled by phlegm flowing from their heads for all their time. And because of this, they say they are the healthiest: for truly, the Libyans are the healthiest of all people whom we know, whether it is because of this, I cannot say for certain, but they are indeed the healthiest. And if the children suffer spasms when they are burned, a remedy is found for them: for they sprinkle goat's urine and relieve them. I say what the Libyans themselves say.
188. The sacrifices for the nomads are these. When they begin to cut off from the animal's ear, they throw it over the house, and having done this, they turn its neck away. They sacrifice only to the sun and the moon. Now, all the Libyans sacrifice to these, but those dwelling around the Tritonian lake sacrifice mostly to Athena, and after her, to Triton and Poseidon.
189. Indeed, the attire and the aegises of the statues of Athena were made by the Greeks from the Libyans: for except that the clothing of the Libyans is of leather and the tassels which hang from the aegises are not serpents but made of strips of cloth, in all else they are fashioned alike. And indeed the very name declares that the attire of the Palladia comes from Libya: for Libyan women wear over their dress a hairless goat-skin dyed with red earth, and from these goat-skins the Greeks have received the name of aegises. And it seems to me that the ceremonial chant also was first introduced here: for greatly do the Libyan women use it in a beautiful manner. And the Greeks have learned to yoke four horses together from the Libyans.
190. The nomads bury the dead according to the Greeks, except for the Nasamones. These people bury them sitting, guarding, when the soul departs, how they will sit them down and not die lying down. The dwellings are compact, made of woven asphodel stalks around ropes, and these are portable. They use such customs.
191. To the west of the Triton River, the land is held by the Ausean farmers, who are Libyans and have houses, and they are called Maxyes. They let the hair on the right side of their heads grow long, while they cut the hair on the left side, and they anoint their bodies with red ochre. They claim to be descendants of the men from Troy. This region, as well as the rest of the western part of Libya, is much more filled with wild animals and forests than the land of the nomads. For the eastern part of Libya, which the nomads inhabit, is low and sandy up to the Triton River, but the land from there to the west, where the farmers live, is very mountainous, wooded, and full of wild animals: for there are the exceedingly large snakes and the lions, as well as the elephants, bears, horned donkeys, and dog-headed and headless people with eyes on their chests, as the Libyans say, and wild men and wild women, and many other wild animals in great number that are not just myths.
192. In the land of the nomads, there are none of these, but other such animals, white-rumped antelopes and gazelles and hartebeest and donkeys, not the ones having horns but other undrinking ones (for they do not drink), and oryx, whose horns the Phoenicians make into lyres (and this beast is the size of an ox), and foxes and hyenas and porcupines and wild rams and dictys and jackals and panthers and borys, and land crocodiles about three cubits long, most similar to lizards, and ostriches, and small snakes, each having one horn: these animals are there and those in the other part, except for deer and wild boar: deer and wild boar are not in Libya at all. There are three kinds of mice there: some are called two-footed, some zegeries (and this name is Libyan, but can be translated into Greek as "hills"), some bristly-haired. There are also weasels in the silphium, most similar to the Tartessian ones. So many wild animals the land of the Libyan nomads has, as far as we, inquiring to the greatest extent, were able to reach.
193. But the Zauekes of the Libyan Maxyes are situated, for whom the women drive the chariots into the war.
194. Following these, the Gyzantes dwell, in whose land much honey is indeed produced by bees, but even more is said to be made by skilled men. All of these people paint themselves with red pigment and eat apes, which are plentiful for them in the mountains.
195. Beside these, the Carthaginians say there lies an island, which is named Cyrauis, in length two hundred stadia, and in breadth narrow, passable from the mainland, full of olive trees and grapevines. And there is a lake in it, from which the maidens of the locals, having used feathers of birds smeared with pitch, bring up a fragment of gold from the mud. Whether this is truly so, I do not know, but I write what is said: and everything could be, since also in Zacynthus I myself saw pitch being brought up from a lake and water. There are indeed more lakes there, but the largest of them is seventy feet all around, and the depth is two fathoms: into this they let down a pole with a myrtle branch attached at the end, and then they bring up pitch on the myrtle, having the smell of asphalt, but in other respects better than the Pierian pitch. They pour it into a pit dug near the lake. And when they have gathered much, thus from the pit they pour it into the amphorae. And whatever falls into the lake, going under the earth, appears in the sea: and it is distant about four stadia from the lake. Thus, then, also the things from the island lying in Libya are likely to be true in reality.
196. The Carthaginians also say these things: there is a region of Libya and people living outside the Pillars of Heracles. When they arrive there and unload their cargo, they place it in order by the wave, and then, having entered their ships, they light a smoky fire. The locals, seeing the smoke, go to the sea and then place gold in exchange for the cargo and withdraw away from the cargo. The Carthaginians disembark to inspect, and if the gold seems to them worthy of the cargo, they take it and depart; but if not, they embark again into their ships and let it be. The locals then approach and place more gold next to what they had put before, until they persuade them. Neither party wrongs the other: for neither do the Carthaginians touch the gold before it is made equal in value to their cargo, nor do the locals touch the cargo before the Carthaginians take the gold.
197. These are the ones whom we have named Libyans, and of these many neither now nor then did they care at all for the king of the Medes. Yet still I have this much to say about this land, that four nations inhabit it and no more than these, as far as we know, and of the nations two are indigenous and two are not; Libyans and Ethiopians are indigenous, the former dwelling in the north and the latter in the south of Libya, while Phoenicians and Greeks are settlers.
198. It seems to me that there is no particular excellence in Libya to be compared with Asia or Europe, except for Cinyps alone; for indeed the land has the same name as the river. This land is similar to the best of lands in producing the fruit of Demeter and does not resemble the rest of Libya at all. For it is black and well-watered with springs, and it is not at all concerned with drought nor does it suffer from excessive rain. For indeed, this part of Libya experiences rain. The same measures of the fruit's yield are established for the Babylonian land. The land that the Euhesperitae inhabit is also good; for when it bears its best, it produces a hundredfold, but the land in Cinyps produces three hundredfold.
199. The land of Cyrene, being the highest part of Libya where nomads dwell, has within itself three harvest seasons worthy of wonder. For first, the crops by the sea are ripe for reaping and gathering; and when these have been collected, the crops in the middle region above the coastal lands are ripe for gathering, which they call the Hills. And when this middle harvest has been collected, the crops in the highest part of the land are ripe and ready for reaping, so that the first harvest has been consumed and devoured, and the last harvest comes together. Thus, for eight months, the harvest holds the people of Cyrene. Let this be said for so much.
200. The avengers of Pheretime, the Persians, having been sent from Egypt by Aryandes, arrived at Barce, and besieged the city, demanding to give up those responsible for the murder of Arcesilaus. But the Barcaeans, for the whole multitude was involved, did not accept these terms. Thus, they besieged Barce for nine months, digging underground tunnels leading to the wall and making strong assaults. Now, a blacksmith discovered the tunnels with a bronze shield, having been informed in this way: he carried it around within the walls and applied it to the ground of the city. The other parts were mute when applied, but where the tunnels were being dug, the bronze of the shield resounded. And the Barcaeans, digging in this direction, killed the Persians who were tunneling. This, indeed, was found out in this way, and the Barcaeans repelled the assaults.
201. But indeed, as much time was spent and many on both sides fell, not less of the Persians, Amasis, the general of the infantry, devised such a plan. Learning that the Barcaeans could not be captured by force but could be captured by deceit, he did the following: at night, having dug a wide trench, he stretched weak planks over it, and below the surface of the planks, he heaped up earth, making it level with the rest of the ground. At the same time, during the day, he challenged the Barcaeans to a discussion: and they gladly obeyed, to the point where they agreed to make a treaty with them. And they made a treaty of this kind, cutting oaths upon the hidden trench, that as long as this earth remained thus, the oath would remain in the land, and the Barcaeans would pay a certain tribute to the king, and the Persians would not undertake anything else against the Barcaeans. After the oath, the Barcaeans, trusting these men, both went out of the city themselves and allowed any of the enemies who wished to go up to the wall, having opened all the gates. But the Persians, having broken down the hidden bridge, rushed inside the wall. And they broke down the bridge for this reason, that they had made it, in order to deceive the Barcaeans, having cut the oath to remain always as long as the earth remained as it was then: but having broken it down, the oath no longer remained in the land.
202. Now indeed, Pheretime, when the most guilty of the Barcaeans were handed over to her by the Persians, impaled them in a circle around the wall, and having cut off the breasts of their women, she displayed them around the wall as well. She ordered the Persians to take the remaining Barcaeans as plunder, except for those who were Battidae and not responsible for the murder. To these people, Pheretime entrusted the city.
203. So then, the Persians enslaved the remaining Barcaeans and led them away. And when they came upon the city of the Cyrenaeans, the Cyrenaeans, fulfilling a certain prophecy, allowed them to pass through the city. As the army was passing through, Badres, the commander of the naval force, ordered to capture the city, but Amasis, the commander of the infantry, did not allow it: for they were sent to attack only Barce, a Greek city. When they had passed through and were sitting on the hill of Lycaean Zeus, they regretted not taking Cyrene. And they tried a second time to enter it, but the Cyrenaeans did not allow it. Then, fear fell upon the Persians, even though no one was fighting them, and they ran away as far as sixty stadia and sat down. When they had set up camp there, a messenger from Aryandes came, calling them back. The Persians, having been asked by the Cyrenaeans, received provisions for their journey, and having taken these, they departed for Egypt. The Libyans, however, took them from there, and on account of their clothing and equipment, they killed those who were left behind and those who were being dragged along, until they arrived in Egypt.
204. This Persian army went to Euhesperidae in Libya and no further. And they enslaved the Barcaeans, and having brought them up from Egypt, they made them go to the king. And the king, Darius, gave them a town in the land of Bactria to settle in. And they gave this town the name Barce, which was still inhabited in the land of Bactria even in my time.
205. Indeed, even Pheretime did not have a good end to her life. For as soon as she had taken vengeance on the Barcaeans from Libya and returned to Egypt, she died miserably: for while she was still alive, worms swarmed out of her body, as it seems that excessively strong acts of revenge become the object of envy from the gods for humans. From Pheretime, the daughter of Battus, such and so great a revenge was inflicted upon the Barcaeans.