1. The Persians who were left in Europe by Darius, of whom Megabazus was the leader, first subdued the Perinthians of the Hellespont, who were unwilling to be subjects of Darius, having previously been severely defeated by the Paeonians. For the Paeonians from the Strymon, having received an oracle from the god to wage war against the Perinthians, and if the Perinthians, when attacked, should call upon them by name, then to attack them, but if they should not call upon them, not to attack, the Paeonians did these things. And when the Perinthians were encamped in the suburb, there a threefold single combat took place between them by challenge: for they fought man against man, horse against horse, and dog against dog. And when the Perinthians had won two of the battles, rejoicing and celebrating, the Paeonians considered this very oracle to be fulfilled and said among themselves, "Now the prophecy would be accomplished for us, now it is our work." Thus, as the Perinthians were celebrating, the Paeonians attacked them, and they both gained a great victory and left few of them alive.
2. Indeed, the events that had previously occurred with the Paeonians happened in this way: but then, as the Perinthians were fighting bravely for their freedom, the Persians and Megabazus overpowered them with their large numbers. And when Perinthus was captured, Megabazus drove his army through Thrace, subduing every city and every nation of those living there for the king. For this had been commanded to him by Darius, to subdue Thrace.
3. The Thracians are indeed the largest nation after the Indians among all people: if they were ruled by one or had the same mindset, they would be invincible and by far the strongest of all nations, in my opinion. But this is difficult and impossible for them to achieve, so they are weak in this respect. They have many names according to their regions, but all of them use similar laws in every aspect, except for the Getae, the Trausi, and those living above the Crestonaeans.
4. Of these, the Getae who believe in immortality do as has been told to me: The Trausi, however, in all other respects perform the same as the other Thracians, but in regard to the one being born and the one dying, they do the following: the relatives surrounding the one being born lament, considering all the evils that he must fulfill after he was born, recounting all human sufferings; but the one who has died, they bury with laughter and rejoicing, recounting how many evils he has been freed from and that he is in complete happiness.
5. But those above the Crestonaeans practice such customs. Each man has many wives; so when one of them dies, a great judgment takes place among the women and there are strong efforts by friends concerning this matter, as to which of them was loved most by the husband. The one who is judged and honored, being praised by both men and women, is slaughtered at the tomb by her closest relative, and after being slaughtered, she is buried with her husband. The other women, however, make a great misfortune for themselves, for this becomes their greatest disgrace.
6. But indeed, for the other Thracians, there is this custom: they sell their children for export, and they do not guard the young women, but they allow them to have intercourse with the men they themselves desire; however, they guard their wives strongly and they buy the wives from the parents with a great amount of money. And to be tattooed is considered noble, while to be untattooed is ignoble. To be idle is most beautiful, but to be a worker of the land is most dishonorable; to live from war and plunder is most beautiful.
7. These indeed are their most notable customs; they revere only these gods: Ares, Dionysus, and Artemis. But their kings, apart from the other citizens, revere Hermes most of all gods, and they swear only by him, and they say they are descended from Hermes himself.
8. The burial rites for their wealthy are as follows: they lay out the dead for three days, and after sacrificing various animals and feasting, they first mourn; then they either burn or otherwise bury the body in the earth, and after pouring a mound, they set up various contests, in which the greatest prizes are awarded according to single combat. These are the burial customs of the Thracians.
9. But the region to the north of this country, no one can accurately say who the people are that inhabit it; but beyond the Ister River, it appears to be a desolate and boundless land. I can only learn of people dwelling beyond the Ister River, who are called Sigynnae, and they wear clothing similar to the Medians. Their horses are said to be shaggy all over their bodies, with hair five fingers deep, and they are small and snub-nosed, unable to carry men, but when yoked to chariots, they are extremely fast. Chariot racing is a custom of the locals. The mountains of these people are said to be near the Eneti who are in the Adriatic. They claim to be colonists of the Medes. How they have become colonists of the Medes, I am not able to explain, but anything can happen in the long course of time. The Sigynnae are called "traders" by the Ligyes people who live above Massalia, and the Cyprians call their spears "sigynnae."
10. As the Thracians say, bees occupy the lands beyond the Ister River, and because of these, it is not possible to pass through further. To me, now, saying these things, they seem to speak not fittingly: for these animals appear to be intolerant of cold. But to me, the lands under the north seem to be uninhabited because of the cold. These things are now spoken about this region: and of its coastal areas, I have heard that Megabazus of the Persians made them his own.
11. When Darius indeed, having crossed the Hellespont as quickly as possible, arrived in Sardis, he remembered both the good service from Histiaeus of Miletus and the advice of Coes the Mytilenaean. Having summoned them to Sardis, he gave them a choice. Histiaeus, as he was ruling Miletus, desired no additional tyranny, but asked for Myrcinus of the Edonians, wishing to build a city there. This, indeed, was his choice. Coes, however, being neither a tyrant nor a commoner, asked to rule Mytilene.
12. After both of their wishes were fulfilled, they went to their chosen places, while Darius was led by a sight to desire to command Megabazus to make the Paeonians, having been captured, to be brought up from Europe to Asia. There were two Paeonian men, Pigres and Mantyes, who, after Darius had crossed into Asia, came to Sardis, wanting to rule the Paeonians, bringing along their tall and beautiful sister. And having waited for Darius to sit down in the suburb of the Lydians, they did the following: having dressed their sister as well as they could, they sent her to fetch water with a vessel on her head, and leading a horse by the bridle, and spinning linen. And when the woman passed by, Darius took notice; for neither Persian nor Lydian customs were being practiced by the woman, nor any of those from Asia. And as he took notice, he sent some of his bodyguards, ordering them to watch what the woman would do with the horse. So they followed behind her; and when she arrived at the river, she raised the horse, and having raised it, she filled the vessel with water, and she passed by the same way, carrying the water on her head, and leading the horse by the bridle, and turning the spindle.
13. Darius, marveling at both what he heard from the scouts and what he himself saw, ordered her to be brought into his presence. And when she was brought, her brothers also came, not far away, having been watching these things. And as Darius asked from what land she was, the young men said they were Paeonians and that she was their sister. He then asked who the Paeonians were, where they lived, and why they had come to Sardis. They explained that they had come to offer themselves to him, that Paeonia was situated by the Strymon River, not far from the Hellespont, and that they were colonists of the Teucrians from Troy. As they said these things, he asked if all the women there were such hard workers. They also eagerly said that it was so, for indeed it was because of this that they had come.
14. At that point, Darius wrote a letter to Megabazus, whom he had left as general in Thrace, ordering him to remove the Paeonians from their lands and bring them to him, both themselves and their children and their wives. Immediately, a horseman rushed, carrying the message to the Hellespont, and having crossed it, he gave the scroll to Megabazus. He, having read it and taken guides from Thrace, marched his army to Paeonia.
15. Hearing, then, the Paeonians that the Persians were coming against them, having gathered, they marched out towards the sea, thinking that the Persians would attempt to invade from there. Indeed, the Paeonians were ready to defend against the army of Megabazus coming upon them: but the Persians, learning that the Paeonians were gathered together and guarding the invasion towards the sea, having guides, they turned to the upper road, and having escaped the notice of the Paeonians, they fell upon their cities, which were empty of men: and attacking them at that time, they easily took possession. And the Paeonians, as they learned that their cities were held, immediately having scattered, each turned to themselves and surrendered themselves to the Persians. Thus, indeed, the Siriopaeones, Paeoplae, and those up to the Prasiad lake, having been removed from their homes, were led into Asia.
16. However, the people around the Pangaean mountain and the Doberes, Agrianes, Odomanti, and the very Prasiad lake were not initially conquered by Megabazus. He tried to remove those who lived in the lake in this way. There were tall piles joined together in the middle of the lake, having a narrow entrance from the mainland by a single bridge. The piles that supported the platform were set up in ancient times by all the citizens together, but afterwards they used a custom in this manner: each man who married brought from the mountain, which is called Orbelus, three piles for each woman, and set them up. Each man took many wives. They lived in such a way, each having a hut on the platform and a trap-door through the piles leading down to the lake. They tied the feet of their infant children with a rope, fearing that they might roll down. They provided fodder for their horses and draft animals with fish. There were so many of these that when a man opened the trap-door and let down an empty basket into the lake with a rope, after not much time he would draw it up full of fish. There were two kinds of fish, which they called "paprakes" and "tilones."
17. The captured Paeonians were indeed led to Asia. And when Megabazus had subdued the Paeonians, he sent messengers to Macedonia, seven Persian men who were with him and were the most esteemed in the camp. These men were sent to Amyntas to ask for land and water for King Darius. There is, in fact, a very short route from the Prasiad lake to Macedonia. For first, there is the mine near the lake, from which later, after these events, a talent of silver came to Alexander each day. And after the mine, by crossing the mountain called Dysorum, one would be in Macedonia.
18. So, the Persians who were sent to Amyntas, when they arrived, having come into the presence of Amyntas, asked for land and water for King Darius. And he gave these things and also invited them as guests, and having prepared a magnificent dinner, he received the Persians hospitably. But when they were done with dinner, drinking, the Persians said the following: "Macedonian stranger, it is a custom for us Persians, when we set forth a great dinner, then also to bring in our concubines and our legitimate wives as fellow diners. Now you, since you received us eagerly and entertain us grandly, and give land and water to King Darius, follow our custom." Amyntas said in response to this: "Oh Persians, this is not our custom, but rather to separate men from women. However, since you, being masters, demand this, it shall be present for you as well." Having said so much, Amyntas sent for the women. And when they were called and came, they sat in a row opposite the Persians. At this point, the Persians, seeing beautiful women, said to Amyntas that this thing that was done was not wise: for it was better for the women not to come in the first place, or, having come and not sitting beside them, to sit opposite, causing pain to their eyes. And being compelled, Amyntas ordered them to sit beside them. And when the women obeyed immediately, the Persians, being rather drunk, began to touch their breasts, and some even tried to kiss them.
19. Amyntas, indeed, seeing these things, held himself without trembling, although distressed, fearing the Persians greatly: but Alexander, the son of Amyntas, being present and seeing these things, being both young and inexperienced in evils, was no longer able to restrain himself, so that, bearing it heavily, he said the following to Amyntas: "Father, you should yield to your age, going away and resting, and do not be weary with drinking: I, staying here, will provide all the necessary things for the guests." In response to these things, Amyntas, understanding that Alexander was about to undertake some reckless action, said: "Oh son, I almost understand your words, that you wish to send me away to do something more violent: therefore, I need you not to act rashly against these men, so that you do not bring harm upon us, but endure seeing the things being done: and concerning my departure, I will obey you."
20. When Amyntas had left, Alexander said to the Persians, "Of these women, strangers, there is much opportunity for you, and if you wish to mingle with all and any of them. Concerning this, you yourselves shall indicate: but now, for it is already near the time of bed approaching for you and I see you are well affected by wine, let these women, if it is pleasing to you, go away to bathe, and after bathing, expect them to return." Having said these things, for the Persians agreed, he sent the women away to the women's quarters, and Alexander himself, having prepared an equal number of men without beards to the women in the clothing of the women and having given them daggers, led them inside, and as he led them, he said these things to the Persians: "O Persians, you are prepared to feast in every way to the end: for both the other things, as many as we had, and to provide in addition to what was possible, all are present for you, and indeed also this, the greatest of all, we offer our own mothers and sisters to you, so that you may learn completely that you are honored by us, as much as you are worthy, and also by the king who sent you, report that a Greek man, a ruler of the Macedonians, received you well both in table and in bed." Having said these things, Alexander seated a Macedonian man next to a Persian man as a woman in word: and when the Persians tried to touch them, they killed them.
21. And these men indeed met their end in this manner, both they themselves and their attendants: for indeed there followed them carriages and servants and the entire great equipment: all these things indeed were made to disappear along with all those men. And after no long time, a great search for these men arose from the Persians, and Alexander seized them by cunning, giving both much money and his own sister, whose name was Gygaea: and having given these things, Alexander seized Bubares, a Persian man, the general of those searching for the lost men.
22. Now indeed the death of these Persians, having been thus discovered, was silenced. But these men, being descendants of Perdiccas, are Greeks, as they themselves say, and I happen to know this myself, and indeed in the following accounts I will demonstrate that they are Greeks; and also the Hellenodicae, who oversee the contest in Olympia, recognized them as such. For when Alexander wished to compete and went down for this very purpose, those Greeks who opposed him tried to exclude him, saying that the contest was not for barbarians but for Greeks; but Alexander, having proved that he was from Argos, was judged to be a Greek, and competing in the stadium race, he coincided with the first.
23. These things indeed thus happened. Megabazus, leading the Paeonians, arrived at the Hellespont; from there, having crossed over, he arrived at Sardis. As Histiaeus of Miletus was already fortifying, having asked from Darius and obtained as a reward the gift of the guard of the bridge, and this place being by the river Strymon, its name is Myrcinus, Megabazus, having learned what was being done by Histiaeus, as he came as quickly as possible to Sardis, leading the Paeonians, said these things to Darius: "O king, what sort of thing have you done, giving to a clever and wise Greek man to found a city in Thrace, where there is abundant shipbuilding timber and many oars, and silver mines, and a large population of Greeks living nearby, and many barbarians, who, taking hold of a leader, will do whatever that man may command, both by day and by night? Now stop this man from doing these things, so that you may not be engaged in a domestic war; but having sent for him in a gentle manner, stop him. And when you have taken hold of him, make it so that he no longer goes to the Greeks."
24. Saying these things, Megabazus easily persuaded Darius, as he foresaw well what was going to happen. Then, having sent a messenger to Myrcinus, Darius said the following: "Histiaeus, King Darius says this: I, considering, find that there is no man more well-disposed than you for me and my affairs; this I know, having learned not by words but by deeds. Now then, since I am planning to accomplish great things, come to me without fail, so that I may explain them to you." Trusting these words, Histiaeus, and at the same time greatly esteeming to become the king's counselor, arrived at Sardis. Upon his arrival, Darius said the following: "Histiaeus, I sent for you for these reasons. As soon as I returned from the Scythians and you were out of my sight, there was nothing else I desired so much in a short time as to see you and to have you come to me for conversation, knowing that of all possessions, a wise and well-disposed friend is the most valuable. I, having recognized both, have you as a witness to my affairs. Now then, since you have done well in coming, I propose this to you: Leave Miletus and the newly-founded city in Thrace, and following me to Susa, have whatever I have, being my table companion and counselor."
25. Darius having spoken these things, and having appointed Artaphrenes, his own half-brother, to be the governor of Sardis, he drove away to Susa, taking Histiaeus with him; and having received Otanes as the general to be of the men by the sea: of whom his father Sisamnes, King Cambyses having become one of the royal judges, because he judged an unjust trial for money, having slaughtered him, he flayed off all the human skin, and having cut his skin into strips, he stretched out the throne on which he was judging: and having stretched it out, Cambyses received him as a judge to be instead of Sisamnes, having killed and flayed him, the son of Sisamnes, having commanded him to remember while sitting on the throne judging.
26. So, this Otanes, who sat on this throne, then having become the successor to Megabazus in the generalship, captured both Byzantines and Chalcedonians, and captured Antandrus in the land of Troad, and captured Lamponium. And having taken ships from the Lesbians, he captured both Lemnos and Imbros, both still inhabited by Pelasgians at that time.
27. Indeed, the Lemnians both fought well and defended themselves for a time, but they were weakened. To those remaining of them, the Persians appointed Lycaretus, the brother of Maeandrius, who had been king of Samos, as their governor. This Lycaretus, ruling in Lemnos, met his end. The cause of this was as follows: he attempted to enslave everyone and accused some of avoiding service against the Scythians, while others he accused of plundering the army of Darius as it was being brought back from the Scythians.
28. This man, having become a general, accomplished so much. Yet, not long after, there was a respite from evils, and the second time, troubles began to arise for the Ionians from both Naxos and Miletus. For Naxos, indeed, was surpassing in prosperity among the islands, and at the same time, Miletus, having reached its peak, was both a source of pride for itself and for Ionia. However, two generations of men before this, Miletus had suffered greatly from internal strife, until the Parians restored it. For the Milesians chose the Parians as reconcilers from all the Greeks.
29. The Parians reconciled them in this way. When their best men arrived in Miletus, for they saw them terribly ruined in their households, they said they wanted to go through the country: and doing this and going through all of Miletus, whenever they saw a field well cultivated in the desolate country, they wrote down the name of the master of the field. And having gone through the whole country and found few of these, they quickly went down to the city, and having made a gathering, they handed over the city to these men whom they found with well-cultivated fields: for they said it seemed that they would take care of public affairs just as they did their own: and they ordered the other Milesians who had been feuding before to obey these men.
30. The Parians indeed then had reconciled the Milesians in this way, but at that time evils began to come upon Ionia from these cities. Men of the wealthy class fled from Naxos because of the common people, and having fled they came to Miletus. Now Aristagoras, the son of Molpagoras, happened to be in charge of Miletus, being both son-in-law and cousin of Histiaeus, the son of Lysagoras, whom Darius was holding in Susa; for Histiaeus was ruler of Miletus and happened to be in Susa at this time, when the Naxians, who had been guests of Histiaeus before, came. And when the Naxians arrived in Miletus, they asked Aristagoras if he could provide them with some force and help them return to their own land. He, having considered that if they returned to the city through him, he would rule Naxos, and making a pretext of the guest-friendship of Histiaeus, offered them this proposal: "I myself am not able to provide you with such a force as to bring you back against the will of the Naxians who hold the city; for I learn that there are eight thousand shields among the Naxians and many long ships. But I will contrive every effort. I have a plan as follows: Artaphrenes happens to be a friend of mine; now Artaphrenes is the son of Hystaspes and the brother of King Darius, and he rules over all the coastal regions of Asia, having a large army and many ships. I think that this man will do whatever we need." Hearing this, the Naxians entrusted the matter to Aristagoras, urging him to do his best, and they ordered him to promise gifts and expenses for the army, as they themselves would pay, having great hopes that when they appeared in Naxos, they would make all the Naxians do whatever they themselves commanded, and so also the other islanders. For none of these Cycladic islands was yet under Darius.
31. Aristagoras, arriving at Sardis, spoke to Artaphrenes, saying that Naxos was an island not large in size, but otherwise beautiful and good, and near Ionia, with much wealth and slaves. "Therefore, lead an army against this land, bringing the exiles from it. And for you, doing this, there is ready from me a large sum of money besides the expenses for the army; for it is just for us, the leaders, to provide this. And you will acquire for the king this island, Naxos itself, and those dependent on it, Paros and Andros and the other so-called Cyclades. From there, setting out, you will easily attack the large and prosperous island of Euboea, no smaller than Cyprus and very easy to be captured. A hundred ships will suffice to subdue all these." And he answered him with these words: "You become a guide to the king's house for good deeds, and you advise all these things well, except for the number of ships; instead of a hundred ships, two hundred will be ready for you at the beginning of spring. But it is necessary for the king himself to approve these things."
32. Upon hearing these things, indeed, Aristagoras was very delighted and went away to Miletus. And Artaphrenes, as he sent a messenger to Susa and having crossed over the things spoken by Aristagoras, Darius himself also approved, prepared indeed two hundred triremes and a very large multitude of Persians and the other allies, and he accepted Megabates, a Persian man of the Achaemenids, cousin of both himself and Darius, as the general of these, to whom Pausanias, the son of Cleombrotus, a Lacedaemonian, if indeed the story is true, later betrothed his daughter, having conceived a passion to become a tyrant of Hellas. And having accepted Megabates as the general, Artaphrenes sent the army to join Aristagoras.
33. Megabates, having taken Aristagoras from Miletus, the Ionian army, and the Naxians, sailed with the pretext of going to the Hellespont. But when they arrived at Chios, he held the ships at Caucasa, so that from there they might cross over to Naxos with a north wind. For it was not necessary for the Naxians to be destroyed by this expedition, but such an event was brought together. As Megabates went around the guards on the ships, he happened upon the ship of Myndus with no one guarding it. He, having done something terrible, ordered his bodyguards to find the captain of this ship, whose name was Scylax, and to bind him, having passed through the ship's cabin, with his head outside and his body inside. But when Scylax was bound, someone reported to Aristagoras that Megabates was mistreating his guest, the Myndian. He, having come, begged the Persian, but obtaining none of the things he needed, he himself went and released him. Megabates, having learned this, was very angry and quarreled with Aristagoras, who said, "What is it to you and these matters? Did not Artaphrenes send you to obey me and sail wherever I command? Why do you meddle so much?" Aristagoras said these things. But Megabates, angered by these things, when night came, sent men by ship to Naxos to inform the Naxians of all the present matters.
34. For the Naxians, indeed, did not expect at all that this expedition would come against them. But when they learned of it, they immediately brought in the things from the fields into the walls, and they prepared as if they were going to be besieged, with food and drink, and they fortified the walls. And they prepared themselves as if war was coming upon them: and when the ships crossed over from Chios to Naxos, they approached the well-prepared city and besieged it for four months. But when the Persians' funds were exhausted, and much of Aristagoras' own money was spent, and the siege required more, at that point, having built walls for the exiled Naxians, they departed to the mainland, faring poorly.
35. Aristagoras, however, was not able to fulfill the promise to Artaphrenes, and at the same time, the expense of the army was pressing him, and he was afraid of the army having fared badly and being slandered by Megabates, and he thought that he would be deprived of the rule of Miletus. And being afraid of each of these things, he was planning a revolt: for it happened that the branded head was sent from Susa by Histiaeus, signifying that Aristagoras should revolt from the king. For Histiaeus, wanting to signify to Aristagoras to revolt, had no other way to signify it safely, since the roads were guarded, but he shaved the head of the most trustworthy of his slaves and branded it, and waited for the hair to grow back, and as soon as it grew back as quickly as possible, he sent him to Miletus, instructing him to do nothing else, but when he arrived at Miletus, to order Aristagoras to shave him and look at his head. And the marks signified, as I said earlier, revolt. Histiaeus did this, making his own confinement in Susa a great misfortune: for if there was a revolt, he had many hopes of returning to the sea, but if nothing new happened to Miletus, he never expected to come to it again.
36. Histiaeus, indeed, now intending these things, sent the messenger, and at the same time, all these things came together for Aristagoras. Therefore, he was deliberating with the rebels, revealing both his own opinion and the things sent from Histiaeus. All the others, indeed, expressed the same opinion, urging to revolt: but Hecataeus, the historian, first did not allow war with the Persian king to be undertaken, listing all the nations that Darius ruled and his power. Then, when he did not persuade, he advised secondly to make it so that they would be rulers of the sea. In no other way, indeed, did he say he saw this happening: for he knew the power of the Milesians was weak: but if the money from the temple in Branchidae, which Croesus the Lydian dedicated, were to be taken away, he had many hopes of dominating the sea, and thus both they would have the money to use and the enemies would not plunder it. And the money was great, as has been shown to me in the first of the stories. This opinion, indeed, did not prevail, but they thought it best to revolt anyway, and one of them sailing to Myus to the camp that had departed from Naxos, being there, to try to capture the generals sailing upon the ships.
37. Iatragoras, having been sent on this mission, and having captured by deceit Oliatus of Mylasa, Histiaeus of Termera, Coes of Mytilene, Aristagoras of Cyme, and many others, thus Aristagoras openly revolted, devising everything against Darius. And first, he changed his tyranny into equal government for Miletus by word, so that the Milesians would willingly join him, and then he did the same in the rest of Ionia, driving out some of the tyrants, and capturing other tyrants from the ships that had sailed to Naxos. Wishing to make these men friends to the cities, he handed them over, giving each one to a different city, from which each one was.
38. Now indeed, when the Mytilenaeans quickly took Coes, they led him out and stoned him to death, but the Cymaeans sent away their own tyrant. And so, most of the others also departed. Now indeed, there was a cessation of tyranny in the cities, and Aristagoras the Milesian, having put an end to the tyrants, ordered each city to establish their own generals. Secondly, he himself became an envoy to Lacedaemon in a trireme, for it was necessary for him to find some great alliance.
39. In Sparta, Anaxandrides, the son of Leon, was no longer reigning as king, but had passed away, and Cleomenes, the son of Anaxandrides, held the kingship, not by virtue of his manly excellence, but by lineage. For Anaxandrides had a wife, who was his own niece, and she was barren, so no children were born to them. As this was the case, the Ephors called him and said, "Even if you do not look out for yourself, this matter is not to be overlooked by us, lest the house of Eurysthenes become extinct. Now, you have a wife, but since she does not bear children, send her away and marry another one. By doing this, you will please the Spartans." But he answered, saying that he would do neither of these things, and that they did not give good advice, urging him to send away his wife, who was blameless, and to bring in another one. He would not be persuaded by them.
40. In response to this, the Ephors and the Elders, having deliberated, presented the following to Anaxandrides: "Since, therefore, we see that you are concerned about the wife you have, do these things, and do not oppose them, so that the Spartans may not devise something different concerning you: we do not need you to send away the wife you have, but provide everything you now provide to her, and in addition to her, bring in another wife who can bear children." When they said this, Anaxandrides agreed, and having two wives, he lived in separate households, doing nothing in the Spartan manner.
41. Not much time having passed, the second wife gave birth to this Cleomenes. And she indeed presented a spare king to the Spartans, and the former wife, who had been childless for a long time, somehow became pregnant, using this coincidence. And when the relatives of the second wife found out, they caused trouble for her, saying that she was boasting and wanting to substitute another child. And as they were causing great trouble, and time was running out, the Ephors, due to their disbelief, guarded the woman as she gave birth. And when she gave birth to Dorieus, she immediately bore Leonidas, and after him, she immediately bore Cleombrotus. And some say that Cleombrotus and Leonidas were twins. And the second wife, having given birth to Cleomenes and being the daughter of Prinetadas, son of Demarmenus, did not give birth to a second child.
42. Indeed, Cleomenes, as it is said, was not of sound mind and quite mad, while Dorieus was the foremost of all his peers, and he well knew how to establish the kingship according to manly virtue. Therefore, with such thoughts, when Anaxandrides died and the Lacedaemonians, following the law, appointed the eldest Cleomenes as king, Dorieus, considering it a terrible thing and not deeming it worthy to be ruled by Cleomenes, asked the Spartans for a group of people and led them to a colony, neither consulting the oracle at Delphi about which land he should go to establish, nor doing anything of the customary things. But bearing it heavily, he went to Libya with the ships; and the men who led him were Theraians. Arriving in Libya, he settled in the most beautiful place of the Libyans, near the Cinyps river. But being expelled from there in the third year by the Macae, Libyans, and Carchedonians, he arrived in the Peloponnese.
43. At this point, Antichares, a man from Eleon, advised him, based on the oracles of Laius, to establish Heraclea in Sicily, saying that the entire region of Eryx belonged to the descendants of Heracles, as Heracles himself had acquired it. Hearing these things, he went to Delphi to consult the oracle, whether he should seize the land to which he was setting out. The Pythia responded that he should seize it. So Dorieus, taking the expedition which he had also led to Libya, was conveyed along Italy.
44. During this time, as the Sybarites say, both they themselves and Telys, their king, were about to wage war against Croton. The Crotoniates, having become greatly afraid, asked Dorieus to avenge them and, having asked, they obtained his help. Indeed, Dorieus joined them in their campaign against Sybaris and captured Sybaris. These things, then, the Sybarites say that Dorieus and those with him did. But the Crotoniates say that they took no foreigner to help them in the war against the Sybarites, except only Callias, the Elean diviner of the Iamidae, and they took him in this way: having fled from Telys, the tyrant of the Sybarites, he came to them, since the sacred rites did not proceed favorably for him when he was sacrificing for victory over Croton.
45. These things, indeed, they say. And each of them presents the following evidence: the Sybarites, indeed, a sacred precinct and a temple being near the dry Crathis, which Dorieus, having captured the city together, they say, founded for Athena, named Crathis. And they make this very death of Dorieus the greatest testimony, that, doing contrary to what was prophesied, he was destroyed: for if indeed he had not transgressed anything, but had done what he was sent to do, he would have taken the Erycine land and, having taken it, held it, and neither he himself nor his army would have been destroyed. But on the other hand, the Crotoniates show that many things were given to Callias, the Elean, in the Crotoniate land, which even in my time the descendants of Callias still possessed, but to Dorieus and the descendants of Dorieus, nothing. And yet, if indeed Dorieus had taken part in the Sybarite war, he would have been given many times more than Callias. These things, then, each of them presents as evidence, and it is possible for whoever is persuaded by them to side with them.
46. Dorieus was accompanied by other founders from Sparta, Thessalus, Paraebates, Celees, and Euryleon. And when they arrived with their entire fleet in Sicily, they died in battle, being defeated by both the Phoenicians and the Egestans. Euryleon alone of the founders survived this misfortune. This man, having gathered the remaining soldiers, took possession of Minoa, the colony of the Selinuntians, and freed the Selinuntians from the tyranny of Pithagoras. But after he had overthrown him, he himself attempted to establish a tyranny over Selinus and ruled for a short time. For the Selinuntians, rising up against him, killed him as he fled to the altar of Zeus in the marketplace.
47. Philippus of Croton, son of Butacides, also joined Dorieus and died with him. This man, having been betrothed to the daughter of Telys of Sybaris, fled from Croton, and having been deceived in the marriage, he went sailing to Cyrene. From there, setting out, he joined Dorieus with his own trireme and at his own expense for the men, being both an Olympic victor and the most beautiful of the Greeks of his time. And because of his beauty, he bore from the Egestans what no one else did: for they, having set up a hero's shrine at his tomb, propitiate him with sacrifices.
48. Now Dorieus indeed met his end in such a manner: if he had endured being ruled by Cleomenes and had stayed in Sparta, he would have become the king of Lacedaemon. For Cleomenes did not rule for a very long time, but died childless, leaving behind only a daughter, whose name was Gorgo.
49. So then, Aristagoras, the tyrant of Miletus, arrived in Sparta when Cleomenes held power. Indeed, he went into conversation, as the Lacedaemonians say, holding a bronze tablet on which the whole circuit of the earth was engraved, and all the sea and all the rivers. And coming into conversation, Aristagoras spoke these things to him: "Cleomenes, do not be surprised at my eagerness to come here, for the situation is such: it is a great disgrace and pain for us Ionians to be slaves instead of free, and even more so for you, the rest, as much as you are the leaders of Greece. Now then, by the gods of the Greeks, save the Ionians from slavery, men of the same blood. And it is easy for you to accomplish this: for the barbarians are not valiant, and you have reached the highest point in the matter of war, and their battle is such, with bows and short spears. They go into battle wearing trousers and turbans on their heads. They are so easy to conquer. And there are also good things for those who inhabit that continent, such as none of the others have together, beginning with gold, silver, and bronze, and colorful clothing, and draft animals, and slaves: you would have these things if you desired them. And they dwell near each other, as I will show: here are the Ionians, and these are the Lydians, who inhabit a good land and are very rich in silver." And showing this, he spoke about the circuit of the earth, which he carried on the tablet, engraved. "And of the Lydians," Aristagoras said, "these Phrygians hold, who are towards the sunrise, and they are the richest in livestock and the most fruitful of all those I know. And of the Phrygians, these Cappadocians hold, whom we call Syrians. And these Cilicians are neighbors to them, reaching to this sea, in which this island of Cyprus lies: they pay a yearly tribute of five hundred talents to the king. And of these Cilicians, these Armenians hold, and they are rich in livestock, and of the Armenians, these Matieni hold this land. And this land of the Cissians is held, in which this Choaspes River lies, and these Susa are situated, where the great king makes his dwelling and the treasuries of his wealth are there: capturing this city, you would already be confident in wealth compared to Zeus. But for the sake of not much land, nor so good, and small mountains, it is necessary for you to fight battles against the Messenians, who are evenly matched, and against the Arcadians and Argives, for whom there is no gold or silver, about which even some eagerness leads one to die fighting: but offering to rule all of Asia easily, will you choose something else?" Aristagoras spoke these things, and Cleomenes answered him with these: "Milesian guest, I will postpone answering you until the third day."
50. At that time, they had reached this point in their discussion. Then, when the main day for the response came and they went to the agreed-upon place, Cleomenes asked Aristagoras how many days' journey from the Ionian Sea it would be to the king's residence. Aristagoras, being wise in other matters and having deceived him well in this, made a mistake: for he should not have told the truth if he indeed wanted to lead the Spartans to Asia, but he did tell the truth, saying that the journey would be of three months. Cleomenes, seizing the rest of the speech that Aristagoras was about to say concerning the journey, said, "Milesian guest, leave Sparta before the sun sets: for you speak no fitting word to the Lacedaemonians, wishing to lead them on a journey of three months away from the sea."
51. After saying these things, Cleomenes went to his house, but Aristagoras, taking a suppliant's position, went to Cleomenes' house. And entering inside, as he was supplicating, he urged Cleomenes to send away the child; for the daughter was standing near Cleomenes, whose name was Gorgo. And this happened to be his only child, being eight or nine years old in age. Cleomenes, however, ordered him to speak what he wanted and not to hold back because of the child. Then Aristagoras began to promise from ten talents, if he would accomplish what he needed. But as Cleomenes refused, Aristagoras advanced with the money, exceeding the previous amount, until he had accepted fifty talents and the child shouted, "Father, the stranger will corrupt you if you do not leave and go away." And indeed, Cleomenes, pleased with the child's advice, went to another dwelling, and Aristagoras was completely dismissed from Sparta, and it did not happen for him to indicate further about the journey to the king.
52. For the road has features like this all around: there are royal rest stations everywhere and the most beautiful resting places, and the whole road is inhabited and safe. Through Lydia and Phrygia, there are twenty stages, and ninety-four and a half parasangs. Then the Halys River is met, upon which there are gates, which must be passed through by all means and thus the river must be crossed, and there is a great guard post on it. Crossing into Cappadocia and traveling through it to the mountains of the Cilicians, there are thirty-two stages, and one hundred and four parasangs. And on these mountains, you will pass through two gates and two guard posts. Having passed through these and made a journey through Cilicia, there are three stages, and fifteen and a half parasangs. There is a river that forms the boundary between Cilicia and Armenia, which is impassable for ships, and its name is Euphrates. In Armenia, there are fifteen rest stations for travelers, and fifty-six and a half parasangs, and a guard post among them. From this Armenia, entering the land of the Matienians, there are thirty-four stages, and one hundred and thirty-seven parasangs. Four rivers flow through this land, which must all be crossed by ferries, first the Tigris, then the second and third, both called the same, not being the same river nor flowing from the same source: for the first of them flows from the Armenians, and the second from the Matienians; and the fourth of the rivers has the name Gyndes, which Cyrus once divided into three hundred and sixty canals. From this land, entering the Cissian territory, there are eleven stages, and forty-two and a half parasangs to the Choaspes River, which is also navigable; and on this river, the city of Susa is built.
53. All these rest stops amount to one hundred and eleven in total. Now, there are so many stages from Sardis to Susa for one who goes up. And if the royal road has been measured correctly in parasangs, and the parasang is able to be thirty stadia, just as this one is able to be these, from Sardis there are stadia to the royal residences called Memnonian, five hundred and three thousand and ten thousand, with there being four hundred and fifty parasangs. And one hundred and fifty stadia per day are traveled, ninety days apart from each other are completed.
54. Thus, to Aristagoras the Milesian, having spoken to Cleomenes the Lacedaemonian, the journey inland being three months was rightly said. And if someone still seeks a more accurate account of this, I will also indicate that: for the road from Ephesus to Sardis must be added to this. And indeed, I say there are in total stages from the Greek sea to Susa (for this city is called Memnonian), forty and four thousand and ten thousand: for there are five hundred and forty stages from Ephesus to Sardis, and thus the three-month journey is extended by three days.
55. And being driven away from Sparta, Aristagoras went to Athens, which had become free from tyrants in this manner. For when Hipparchus, the son of Pisistratus and brother of the tyrant Hippias, saw a vision in a dream, he was killed by Aristogiton and Harmodius, who were of Gephyraean descent from long ago. After this, the Athenians were under tyranny for four years, no less but even more than before.
56. Now the vision of Hipparchus in a dream was this: on the night before the Panathenaea, Hipparchus seemed to have a man standing over him, great and handsome, uttering these words: "Endure, lion, the unendurable with a lion's heart; no one of men who does wrong will not pay the penalty." And these things, as soon as day came, he was eager to reveal to the interpreters of dreams; but after dismissing the vision, he sent forth the procession, in which indeed he met his end.
57. The Gephyraeans, of whom the murderers of Hipparchus were, as they themselves say, had originally come from Eretria, but as I, inquiring, find, they were Phoenicians of those who came with Cadmus to the land now called Boeotia, and having obtained a portion of this country, the Tanagric portion. Then, when the Cadmeans had first been driven out by the Argives, these Gephyraeans, having been driven out a second time by the Boeotians, turned to the Athenians. And the Athenians received them on fixed terms to be citizens of their own, and they imposed on them many tasks and not worthy of mention to perform.
58. These Phoenicians who came with Cadmus, of whom the Gephyraeans were, having settled in this country, introduced many other things and among them the alphabet, which was not known before to the Greeks, as it seems to me. First, the Phoenicians used it, and then, as time went on, with the change of the sound, they changed the shape of the letters as well. Most of the surrounding areas were inhabited by Ionian Greeks, who, having learned the alphabet from the Phoenicians, made a few changes to the letter forms and used it themselves, and they called it "Phoenician," as it was just that the Phoenicians had brought it to Greece. The Ionians also called sheets of papyrus "skins" from the old times, because they used to write on sheep and goat skins when there was a scarcity of papyrus. Even in my time, many of the barbarians still write on such skins.
59. I myself saw Cadmean letters in the sanctuary of Apollo Ismenius in Thebes of Boeotia, inscribed on three tripods, being mostly similar to the Ionian ones. Indeed, one of the tripods bears the inscription, "Amphitryon dedicated me from the spoils of Teleboae." These would be of the same age as Laius, the son of Labdacus, the son of Polydorus, the son of Cadmus.
60. Another tripod in hexameter tone says, "Scaeus, the boxer, having won, dedicated me to far-shooting Apollo, a very beautiful statue." And Scaeus would be the son of Hippocoon, if indeed this is the one dedicated and not another having the same name as Hippocoon's son, being of the same age as Oedipus, the son of Laius.
61. The third tripod also speaks in hexameter, "Laodamas himself dedicated this tripod to far-shooting Apollo, a very beautiful statue, while ruling alone." Indeed, during the reign of this Laodamas, son of Eteocles, the Cadmeans are expelled by the Argives and turn to the Encheleans. The Gephyraeans, however, are left behind and later, driven out by the Boeotians, they withdraw to Athens. There, they have established sacred rites in Athens, in which none of the other Athenians partake, separate from the other sanctuaries, and indeed, the temple and mysteries of Achaean Demeter.
62. Indeed, I have already related the dream of Hipparchus and the origins of the Gephyreans, from whom the murderers of Hipparchus came. But it is necessary to take up again the account which I began to tell, concerning how the Athenians were freed from the tyranny. While Hippias was ruling as a tyrant and growing harsher towards the Athenians on account of the death of Hipparchus, the Alcmeonidae, who were Athenians and exiles fleeing the sons of Pisistratus, when their attempt together with the other Athenian exiles to return by force was not advancing, but they were suffering greatly in their efforts to go down and to free Athens, having fortified Lipsydrium, which is above Paeonia, there the Alcmeonidae, contriving every means against the sons of Pisistratus, hired from the Amphictyons the temple at Delphi, which exists now but did not yet then, to build it anew. And being well supplied with money and being men of repute even from of old, they both completed the temple more beautiful than the model and, although they had agreed to make the temple of tufa stone, they made the front of it of Parian marble.
63. So then, as the Athenians say, these men, sitting in Delphi, persuaded the Pythia with money, so that Spartan men would come, either on a private or public mission, to set their Athens free. And the Lacedaemonians, as the same thing always appeared to them, sent Anchimolius, the son of Aster, a reputable citizen, with an army to drive out the Pisistratidae from the Athenians, although they were their close friends: for they held the matters of the god in higher regard than those of men: and they sent these men by sea with ships. He, indeed, having approached Phalerum, disembarked the army, but the Pisistratidae, having learned these things beforehand, called for help from Thessaly: for an alliance had been made with them. And the Thessalians, when they were asked, sent them, using a common decision, a thousand horsemen and their own king, Cineas, a man of Conium. Then, when the Pisistratidae had them as allies, they contrived the following: having cut down the plain of the Phalerians and made this place suitable for horses, they sent the horsemen against the camp: and having attacked, they destroyed many other Lacedaemonians and indeed also Anchimolius: and those who survived of them, they forced down to the ships. So then, the first expedition from Lacedaemon was thus dismissed, and there are tombs of Anchimolius in the land of Attica at Alopecae, near the Heracleum which is in Cynosarges.
64. After this, the Lacedaemonians sent a larger force to Athens, having appointed as general of the army King Cleomenes, the son of Anaxandrides, no longer sending them by sea but by land. As they entered the land of Attica, the Thessalian cavalry first engaged with them and not long after, they were turned back, with more than forty men falling from their side. The remaining ones quickly retreated to Thessaly as they could. Cleomenes, having arrived at the city along with the Athenians who desired to be free, besieged the tyrants who had been forced into the Pelasgic wall.
65. And the Lacedaemonians would not have been able to capture the Pisistratids at all: for they neither intended to blockade them, and the Pisistratids were well-supplied with food and drink, and having besieged them for a few days, they would have departed to Sparta. But now, a misfortune happened to one side and the same was an ally to the other: for the sons of the Pisistratids were captured while being secretly sent out of the country. And when this happened, all their affairs were thrown into confusion, and they agreed to leave Attica within five days, accepting the terms set by the Athenians in exchange for the safe return of their children, so that they departed from Attica in five days. And after they departed, they went to Sigeum on the Scamander River, having ruled the Athenians for thirty-six years, and they too were descendants of Pylos and Neleus, having come from the same families as those of Codrus and Melanthus, who had previously come from abroad to become kings of Athens. And on this account, Hippocrates also named his son Pisistratus, making the name in memory of Pisistratus, the son of Nestor. Thus, the Athenians were freed from the tyrants: and the significant events that they did or suffered after being freed, before Ionia revolted against Darius and Aristagoras of Miletus came to Athens seeking their help, I will tell these first.
66. Athens, being already a great city, then became even greater after being freed from the tyrants. In it, two men held power: Cleisthenes, a man of the Alcmaeonid family, who is said to have persuaded the Pythian priestess, and Isagoras, son of Tisandrus, belonging to a distinguished family, but I cannot tell his exact lineage; his relatives, however, made sacrifices to Zeus of Caria. These men were in conflict over power, and Cleisthenes, being defeated, allied himself with the common people. Afterward, he changed the Athenians from being divided into four tribes to being divided into ten tribes, removing the names of the sons of Ion - Geleon, Aegicores, Argades, and Hoples - and finding names of other local heroes, except for Aias. This man, being a foreigner, he added as a neighbor and ally.
67. In my opinion, this Cleisthenes was imitating his own maternal grandfather, Cleisthenes the tyrant of Sicyon. For Cleisthenes, having waged war against the Argives, stopped rhapsodes from competing in Sicyon on account of the Homeric verses, because Argos and the Argives are celebrated in them for the most part. And since there was and still is a shrine of Adrastus, son of Talaus, in the very marketplace of the Sicyonians, Cleisthenes desired to drive this Argive hero out of the land. So he went to Delphi and inquired whether he should banish Adrastus. But the Pythia responded to him, saying that Adrastus was king of the Sicyonians, while he was just a stone thrower. Since the god did not grant this, Cleisthenes went back and devised a plan by which Adrastus himself would be driven out. When he thought he had found it, he sent to Thebes in Boeotia, saying he wanted to bring Melanippus, son of Astacus, to his country. The Thebans gave him up. Cleisthenes, having brought Melanippus, received a precinct for him in the very government house and established him there in the strongest place. Cleisthenes brought Melanippus (for this too must be told) as the greatest enemy of Adrastus, who had killed both his brother Mecisteus and his son-in-law Tydeus. And when he had received the precinct, he took away the sacrifices and festivals of Adrastus and gave them to Melanippus. The Sicyonians were accustomed to greatly honor Adrastus: for this land was that of Polybus, and Adrastus was the son of Polybus' daughter, and when Polybus died childless, he left the kingship to Adrastus. So the Sicyonians honored Adrastus in other ways, and they even raised tragic choruses in response to his sufferings, not honoring Dionysus, but Adrastus. Cleisthenes, however, gave the choruses back to Dionysus and the rest of the worship to Melanippus.
68. These things indeed he had done to Adrastus, and the tribes of the Dorians, so that they would not be the same for the Sicyonians and the Argives, he changed to other names. There he laughed most at the Sicyonians: for upon a pig and a donkey, changing the names, he put the last parts, except for his own tribe: for this one he set the name from his own rule. These indeed were called Archelaoi, others Hyatai, others Oneatai, others Choireatai. With these names of the tribes, the Sicyonians used them while Cleisthenes was ruling and after he had died for sixty years still: afterward, however, giving a reason to themselves, they changed to the Hylleis and Pamphyloi and Dymanatai, and they added a fourth to themselves, making the name from the son of Adrastus, Aegialeus, to be called Aegialeis.
69. Now indeed the Sicyonian Cleisthenes had made these changes, and the Athenian Cleisthenes, being the grandson of this Sicyonian and having his name, it seems to me that he also, looking down on the Ionians, so that the same tribes would not be for them and for the Ionians, imitated the namesake Cleisthenes. For indeed, as he had then added the Athenian people, who were previously excluded, to his own share, he changed the names of the tribes and made more from fewer: indeed, he made ten tribe-wardens instead of four, and he distributed the ten districts among the tribes. And by adding the people, he was much stronger than those who opposed him.
70. In the part where Isagoras was losing, he contrived the following: he called upon Cleomenes, the Lacedaemonian, who had become his guest-friend from the time of the siege of the Pisistratidae; and Cleomenes had a reason to visit the wife of Isagoras. First, Cleomenes sent a herald to Athens, expelling Cleisthenes and many other Athenians along with him, calling them the "Accursed"; and he sent these things, saying from the teaching of Isagoras. For indeed, the Alcmeonidae and their allies had a reason for this murder, but he himself did not partake, nor did his friends.
71. The "Accursed" of the Athenians were named thus. There was a man named Cylon among the Athenians, an Olympic victor: this man attempted to seize tyranny, and having pretended friendship with his peers, he tried to take over the citadel, but being unable to prevail, he sat as a suppliant near the statue. The presidents of the naval boards, who then governed Athens, raised these men, guaranteeing them everything except death: but the Alcmaeonidae are held responsible for killing them. These events took place before the time of Pisistratus.
72. When Cleomenes indeed, sending forth, expelled Cleisthenes and the Accursed, Cleisthenes himself secretly withdrew. But after no less, Cleomenes was present in Athens, not with a large force, and arriving, he banished seven hundred Athenian households, which Isagoras proposed to him. Having done these things, he attempted to dissolve the Council for the second time, and he handed over the offices to the three hundred partisans of Isagoras. But when the Council opposed and did not wish to obey, both Cleomenes and Isagoras and his partisans seized the acropolis. The remaining Athenians, having thought the same things, besieged them for two days: on the third day, they came out under a truce from the land, as many of them as were Lacedaemonians. The rumor was fulfilled for Cleomenes. For when he went up to the acropolis, intending indeed to seize it, he went to the inner sanctuary of the goddess as if to consult: the priestess, rising from the throne, before he could open the doors, said, "O stranger from Lacedaemon, go back and do not enter the sanctuary: for it is not lawful for Dorians to pass in here." And he said, "O woman, but I am not a Dorian but an Achaean." He, indeed, not using the oracle at all, both attempted and then again fell out with the Lacedaemonians: the other Athenians bound the ones upon death, and among them also Timesitheus the Delphian, of whom I would be able to recount the greatest deeds of hands and feet.
73. These men, then, having been bound, met their end. And after these things, the Athenians, having sent for Cleisthenes and the seven hundred households that had been banished by Cleomenes, sent messengers to Sardis, wanting to make an alliance with the Persians; for they believed that they had been made enemies of the Lacedaemonians and Cleomenes. And when the messengers arrived in Sardis and spoke the things that had been entrusted to them, Artaphrenes, the son of Hystaspes and ruler of Sardis, asked who these men were and where they lived, as they sought to become allies of the Persians. And having learned from the messengers, he responded to them with these words: if the Athenians give King Darius earth and water, he would make an alliance with them; but if they do not give, he commanded them to depart. And the messengers, taking the matter upon themselves, said they would give, wanting to make the alliance. These men, then, having gone back to their own land, had great charges against them.
74. Cleomenes, indeed, knowing that he had been greatly insulted by the Athenians in both words and deeds, gathered an army from all of the Peloponnese, not revealing his true intention, which was to take revenge on the Athenian people and to establish Isagoras as a tyrant, for he had left the acropolis with him. Cleomenes, then, with a large force, invaded Eleusis, and the Boeotians, acting on a plan, seized Oenoe and Hysiae, the bordering regions of Attica, while the Chalcidians, on the other hand, entered and raided lands of Attica. The Athenians, however, although being in a state of uncertainty, intended to deal with the Boeotians and Chalcidians later, but they set themselves against the Peloponnesians who were in Eleusis, armed for battle.
75. As the armies were about to engage in battle, the Corinthians first gave reason to themselves that they were not acting justly, and so they changed their minds and withdrew. After them, Demaratus, the son of Ariston, who was also a king of the Spartans and had led the army out of Lacedaemon, and had not been at odds with Cleomenes in the past. From this division, a law was established in Sparta that it was not allowed for both kings to follow when an army was sent out: for until then, both had accompanied the army. But with this change, one of the two was to be left behind, as well as one of the sons of Tyndarus: for indeed, before this, both of them, being called upon for help, had accompanied the army. Then, at Eleusis, when the remaining allies saw that the kings of the Lacedaemonians were not in agreement and that the Corinthians had left their position, they too went away, withdrawing themselves.
76. This, indeed, was the fourth time that the Dorians arrived in Attica, having invaded twice for war and twice for the good of the Athenian populace. First, when they also settled Megara: this expedition would rightly be called during the reign of Codrus of the Athenians. Second and third, when they set out from Sparta to drive out the sons of Pisistratus, and fourth, at that time when Cleomenes, leading the Peloponnesians, invaded Eleusis. Thus, the Dorians invaded Athens for the fourth time then.
77. So when this fleet was disgracefully dispersed, the Athenians, wanting to exact revenge, first made a military expedition against the Chalcidians. The Boeotians, however, came to the aid of the Chalcidians at Euripus. When the Athenians saw the Boeotians, they decided to attack the Boeotians rather than the Chalcidians. Indeed, the Athenians engaged in battle with the Boeotians and greatly prevailed, having killed many and taken seven hundred of them captive. On that very same day, the Athenians crossed over to Euboea and fought against the Chalcidians, and having defeated them as well, they left four thousand settlers on the land of the horse-breeding Chalcidians. The horse-breeders were called the wealthy among the Chalcidians. As for those they captured, they held them in prison along with the Boeotian captives, having bound them in chains. In time, they released them, having ransomed them for two minae each. The chains in which they were bound, they hung up in the acropolis, which even in my time were still hanging, suspended from walls that had been burnt by the Persians' fire, opposite the west-facing temple. And from the ransoms, they dedicated a tenth, having made a bronze four-horse chariot, which stands on the left hand as one enters the outer porch of the acropolis, and the following is inscribed on it: "Having subdued the nations of the Boeotians and Chalcidians, the sons of the Athenians, by deeds in war, they extinguished their insolence in a dark iron bond; of the horses, they set this tenth for Pallas."
78. Now the Athenians indeed grew in power. And it is clear not only in one aspect but in every way that equality is a serious matter, for when the Athenians were ruled by tyrants, they were no better in war than any of their neighbors, but when they were freed from the tyrants, they became far superior. This demonstrates that while being oppressed, they were willingly doing harm as if working for a master, but when they were liberated, each one of them was eager to work for themselves.
79. These indeed now took this course of action. The Thebans, however, after this, sent to the god, wanting to take revenge on the Athenians. The Pythia, from themselves indeed, said to them that there was no revenge, but having brought out the many-voiced, she commanded to ask for help from the nearest. So, when the envoys went away, they brought out the oracle, having made it public: as they inquired, saying to ask for help from the nearest, the Thebans, having heard these things, said, "Are not then the Tanagraeans and the Coroneans and the Thespians dwelling nearest to us? And these indeed always fighting with us eagerly share the war: why do we need to ask for help from these? But rather, perhaps this is not the oracle."
80. While discussing such matters, someone who had learned something then said, "I think I understand what the oracle wants to tell us. Thebe and Aegina are said to be daughters of Asopus, and being sisters, it seems to me that the god advises us to ask the Aeginetans to become avengers." And since no better opinion seemed to appear, they immediately sent a request to the Aeginetans, invoking the oracle to help them, as they were the nearest allies. The Aeginetans, in response to their request for assistance, said they would send the Sons of Aeacus to help.
81. The Thebans, having tried with the alliance of the Aeacidae and quickly being defeated by the Athenians, again the Thebans sent, giving back the Aeacidae to them, and they asked for men. The Aeginetans, having been lifted up by great prosperity and reminded of an old hatred against the Athenians, then, when the Thebans asked, they brought an undeclared war upon the Athenians: for while they were pressing upon the Boeotians, sailing with long ships into Attica, they dragged down Phaleron and many other coastal towns, and doing these things, they greatly harmed the Athenians.
82. The enmity towards the Athenians from the Aeginetans arose from the beginning in this way. The Epidaurians' land bore no fruit. So, concerning this misfortune, the Epidaurians consulted the oracle at Delphi. The Pythia commanded them to establish statues of Damia and Auxesia, and having established them, things would go better for them. The Epidaurians then inquired whether they should make the statues of bronze or stone. The Pythia, however, did not allow either of these, but rather of cultivated olive wood. So, the Epidaurians asked the Athenians to give them an olive tree to cut down, considering those to be the most sacred. It is said that there were no olive trees anywhere else on earth at that time except in Athens. The Athenians, however, said they would give it on the condition that they would take away each year offerings to Athena Polias and Erechtheus. The Epidaurians agreed to these terms, and they obtained what they asked for and made statues from these olive trees and set them up. And their land bore fruit for them, and the Athenians received what they had agreed upon.
83. During this time, and even before, the Aeginetans were subject to the Epidaurians, and in other matters, they went to Epidaurus to give and receive judgments from one another. But from this time, having built ships and acted with recklessness, they revolted from the Epidaurians. And being at odds with them, they showed themselves, being masters of the sea, and indeed they took away these statues of Damia and Auxesia from them, and they carried them away and set them up in their own land, in the inland region, which is called Oea, and is about twenty furlongs away from the city. Having set them up in this place, they propitiated them with sacrifices and female choruses performing mocking songs, with ten men being appointed as chorus leaders for each of the goddesses. The choruses, however, spoke ill of no man, but the local women. The same sacred rites were also performed by the Epidaurians, and there are also secret rites performed among them.
84. When these statues were stolen, the Epidaurians did not fulfill their agreement with the Athenians. And so, the Athenians sent an angry message to the Epidaurians, who argued that they were not unjust: for as long as they had the statues in their land, they fulfilled their agreement, but since they were deprived of them, it was not fair to still carry it out, but they ordered the Athenians to deal with the Aeginetans who had the statues. In response to this, the Athenians sent to Aegina to demand the statues, but the Aeginetans said that there was no business for them and the Athenians.
85. The Athenians now say that after the demand, they sent a single trireme with some of these citizens, who, having been sent from the common people and arriving in Aegina, tried to pull these statues from their pedestals, as they were made of their own wood, so that they might bring them back. But not being able to prevail in this way, they wrapped ropes around the statues and pulled them, and as they pulled, there was thunder and at the same time an earthquake occurred. The trireme crew, who were pulling, became confused by these events, and having suffered this, they killed each other as if they were enemies, until from all, one was left and he was brought back to Phalerum.
86. The Athenians indeed say that it happened this way, but the Aeginetans say that the Athenians did not come with just one ship; for with one and only a few more than one, and if they did not happen to have ships, they could easily defend themselves. But they say that the Athenians came with many ships to their land, and they themselves yielded to them and did not fight a naval battle. They cannot make this clear, neither if they, recognizing themselves to be weaker in the naval battle, yielded for this reason, nor if they, wanting to do something, were able to do what they did. Now the Athenians, since no one stood against them in battle, disembarked from the ships and turned to the statues, and not being able to pull them up from the pedestals, they wrapped ropes around them and pulled, until the statues, being pulled, did the same thing to both, not believable to me, but to someone else: for they say that they fell on their knees, and from that time they have remained in this position. The Athenians indeed did these things: but the Aeginetans say that they, learning that the Athenians were about to wage war against them, prepared the Argives. And indeed, the Athenians disembarked on the Aeginetan land, and the Argives came to help them and secretly crossed from Epidaurus to the island and did not announce beforehand to the Athenians that they would attack them as they were cut off from the ships, and at the same time, the thunder and the earthquake occurred to them.
87. Now this story is told by the Argives and Aeginetans, and it is also agreed by the Athenians that only one of them who was saved came to Attica. However, the Argives say that this one man survived after they destroyed the Athenian camp, while the Athenians say it was due to divine intervention. Yet, this one man did not survive for long, but perished in the following manner. Having been brought back to Athens, he reported the disaster. When the wives of the men who had gone to Aegina heard this, they did something terrible, angry that only this one man had been saved out of all of them. They surrounded this man and stabbed him with the pins of their garments, each of them asking where her own husband was. And so, this man perished in this way, and the Athenians thought that the deed of the women was even more terrible than the disaster itself. They had no other way to punish the women, so they changed their clothing to the Ionian style. For indeed, before this, the women of Athens wore Dorian clothing, which was very similar to the Corinthian. So they changed to the linen tunic, so that they would not use pins.
88. However, for those who rely on the truth, this dress is not originally Ionian, but Carian; for indeed, the ancient Greek dress of all women was the same as what is now called Dorian. And for the Argives and the Aeginetans, in addition to this, they have a law among themselves that the brooch-pins should be made half the size of the previously established measure, and that the women should especially dedicate brooches to the temple of these gods. And they decided that neither any other thing from Attica should be brought to the temple, nor pottery, but from now on, it should be the custom to drink there from local earthenware vessels.
89. Since that day, indeed up to my time, the women of Argos and Aegina wore brooch-pins longer than before because of their feud with the Athenians. The hostility between the Athenians and Aeginetans began as I have mentioned, and then, when the Thebans called for help, the Aeginetans eagerly joined them, remembering the issue with the statues. The Aeginetans indeed attacked the coast of Attica, and when the Athenians prepared to fight back against the Aeginetans, an oracle came from Delphi, advising them to hold back from the Aeginetans' wrongdoing for thirty years, and in the thirty-first year, having dedicated a sacred area to Aeacus, to begin the war against the Aeginetans, and it would go well for them; but if they immediately went to war, they would indeed suffer many things in the meantime and do many things, but ultimately they would prevail. When the Athenians heard these things that were reported, they dedicated a sacred area to Aeacus, which now stands in the marketplace, but they could not bear to wait for thirty years, having heard that it was necessary to hold back after suffering lawlessness at the hands of the Aeginetans.
90. As they were preparing for retaliation, an issue arising from the Lacedaemonians became an obstacle for them. For the Lacedaemonians, having learned about the schemes of the Alcmaeonids with the Pythian priestess and the double disaster brought upon them and the Pisistratidae by the Pythian priestess, were angry for two reasons: both because they had driven out men who were guests to them from their own land, and because no gratitude appeared to be shown by the Athenians for their actions. And in addition to these things, the oracles were urging them on, saying that many hostile and lawless acts would come upon them from the Athenians, of which they had previously been unaware, but then learned when Cleomenes brought them to Sparta. Cleomenes, however, obtained the oracles from the Athenian acropolis, which the Pisistratidae had previously possessed, but when they were driven out, they left them in the temple, and Cleomenes, having found them left behind, took them up.
91. Then, when the Lacedaemonians had taken back the oracles and saw the Athenians growing in power and by no means ready to obey them, they conceived the thought that, while the Attic race was free, it would be a match for their own, but if it were held down by tyranny, it would be weak and ready to obey. Having learned each of these things, they sent for Hippias, the son of Pisistratus, from Sigeum on the Hellespont, to which the Pisistratidae had fled. And when Hippias, being summoned, had come to them, having also sent for messengers from the other allies, the Spartans spoke to them as follows: "Men who are allies, we acknowledge that we ourselves have not acted rightly. For, having been deceived by false prophecies, we drove out men who were our close friends and who were ready to put Athens under our control, and then, having done this, we handed over the city to an ungrateful people. And when they had been freed through us and had risen up, they insulted us and our king and drove us out, and their reputation grows, so that their neighbors, the Boeotians and the Chalcidians, have learned this most of all, and soon someone else will learn it by making a mistake. But since we made a mistake in doing these things, we will now try, coming together with you, to take vengeance on them. For it is for this very reason that we have sent for this Hippias here and for you from your cities, so that, with a common plan and a common expedition, we may bring him into Athens and give back what we also took away."
92. These things were being said, but the majority of the allies did not accept the words. Now, the others remained silent, but a Corinthian, Socles, spoke these things: "Indeed, the sky will be below the earth and the earth will be suspended above the sky, and men will have their dwelling in the sea and fish will have theirs on the land, when you, Lacedaemonians, prepare to bring down tyrannies, destroying equal powers in the cities, of which there is nothing more unjust nor more murderous among men. For if indeed this seems good to you, that the cities be ruled by tyrants, first establish a tyrant among yourselves, and then seek to establish them for the others. But now, being inexperienced in tyranny yourselves, and guarding most fiercely against this happening in Sparta, you are treating your allies unfairly. If you were experienced in it, as we are, you would have better opinions to contribute than you do now." For the Corinthians, the state of their city was as follows: there was an oligarchy, and these men, called the Bacchiadae, ruled the city, marrying and leading from among themselves. Now, to these men, Amphion had a lame daughter: her name was Labda. Since none of the Bacchiadae wanted to marry her, Eetion, son of Echecrates, took her, being from the common people of Petra, but tracing his lineage back to Lapithes and Caeneus. From this woman, and not from any other, children were born to him. So he was sent to Delphi concerning offspring. As he entered, the Pythian priestess immediately addressed him with these verses: "Eetion, no one honors you, though you are very worthy. Labda is pregnant, and she will give birth to a wheel of destruction, which will fall upon the ruling men and will bring justice to Corinth." These things, having been prophesied to Eetion, were somehow reported to the Bacchiadae, for whom the earlier oracle sent to Corinth was unknown, which brought the same message as Eetion's and said this: "An eagle in the rocks is pregnant, and she will give birth to a strong, devouring lion, which will loosen the knees of many. Consider these things well, Corinthians, you who dwell around beautiful Peirene and lofty Corinth." This oracle, having been given to the Bacchiadae earlier, was unclear; but when they learned of the one given to Eetion, they immediately understood that it was in harmony with Eetion's. Having understood this, they kept quiet, wanting to destroy the offspring that was to be born to Eetion. As soon as the woman gave birth, they sent ten of their own men to the village where Eetion lived to kill the child. These men, arriving at Petra and going into Eetion's courtyard, asked for the child. Labda, knowing nothing of the reason for their arrival, and thinking they were asking for the child out of affection for its father, brought and handed it to one of them. Now, it had been planned that the first of them to receive the child would dash it to the ground. So when Labda brought it, the child smiled at the man who took it, and some pity held him back from killing it; feeling compassion, he handed it to the second man, and he to the third. In this way, it was passed through all ten, with none of them wanting to carry out the deed. So they handed the child back to its mother and went outside, standing at the doors and accusing one another, especially the first man who took the child, for not doing what had been decided. As time went on, they decided to go back in and all share in the murder. But it was necessary for evil to spring up from Eetion's offspring for Corinth. For Labda, hearing all these things while standing near the doors, was afraid that they would change their minds and, taking the child a second time, would kill it. So she brought it and hid it in the place that seemed to her the most unnoticeable, in a chest, knowing that if they returned to search, they would thoroughly investigate everything. And indeed, this happened. They came and searched, but as it did not appear to them, they thought it best to leave and say to those who sent them that they had done everything they had been instructed to do. And so they said these things. After this, Eetion's son grew up, and having escaped this danger from the chest, he was named Cypselus. When he became a man and consulted an oracle, he received a double-meaning prophecy at Delphi, which he trusted and seized Corinth. The oracle was as follows: "Blessed is the man who enters my house, Cypselus, son of Eetion, king of famous Corinth, he and his sons, but no longer his sons' sons." This was the prophecy, and when Cypselus became a tyrant, he was such a man: he exiled many Corinthians, deprived many of their wealth, and took the lives of many more. After ruling for thirty years and living a good life, his son Periander succeeded him as the tyrant. Now, Periander was initially gentler than his father, but after corresponding with Thrasybulus, the tyrant of Miletus, he became much more bloodthirsty than Cypselus. For he sent a messenger to Thrasybulus to inquire how he could best and most securely govern the city. Thrasybulus led the messenger who came from Periander outside the city, and as he walked through a field of wheat, he asked questions while cutting off the tallest ears of wheat and throwing them away, until he had destroyed the best and tallest part of the crop in this manner. Then he went through the field and said nothing, sending the messenger back. When the messenger returned to Corinth, Periander was eager to learn the advice, but the messenger said that Thrasybulus had given no advice and was amazed that Periander would send him to such a man, who was clearly mad and had ruined his own affairs. Periander, understanding what had been done and realizing that Thrasybulus was advising him to kill the most prominent citizens, then displayed every kind of wickedness towards the people. For whatever Cypselus had left undone in killing and driving out, Periander completed, and in one day he stripped all the women of Corinth naked because of his wife Melissa. For when he sent messengers to the Thesprotians at the Acheron River to consult the oracle of the dead about a deposit of a foreign friend, Melissa's ghost, appearing, said that she would neither reveal nor conceal the deposit in the place where it was hidden, for she was cold and naked, for the clothes with which he had buried her were of no use, not having been burnt. As proof that she was telling the truth, she said that Periander had put bread on a cold oven. When this was reported back to Periander, he immediately made a proclamation after the message that all the women of Corinth should go to the temple of Hera. The women, thinking it was a festival, went dressed in their finest clothes, but Periander, having stationed his bodyguards, stripped them all alike, both the free women and the slaves, and having gathered them together in a pit, he prayed to Melissa and burned them. Having done this and sent a second message, the ghost of Melissa revealed the hidden deposit of the foreign friend. Such is tyranny, O Lacedaemonians, and such are its deeds. But we Corinthians were greatly amazed when we saw you sending for Hippias, and now we are even more amazed at your words, and we bear witness, calling upon the gods of the Greeks, not to establish tyrannies in the cities. Will you not cease but try to bring Hippias back contrary to justice? Know that you will not have the consent of the Corinthians.
93. Socles, indeed, from Corinth as an ambassador, spoke these things, and Hippias answered him, invoking the same gods as he did, that indeed the Corinthians most of all would long for the Pisistratidae when the days come for them to be troubled by the Athenians. Hippias, indeed, answered these things, understanding the oracles most accurately of men. The rest of the allies, however, held themselves in silence until now, but when they heard Socles speaking freely, each one of them, breaking their silence, chose the opinion of the Corinthian, and they bore witness to the Lacedaemonians not to do anything new concerning a Greek city.
94. Thus, indeed, this was stopped. But then, as Hippias was being driven away, Amyntas, the king of the Macedonians, offered him Anthemus, and the Thessalians offered Iolcus. He, however, chose neither of these, but retreated back to Sigeum, which Pisistratus had taken by force from the Mytilenaeans, and having gained control of it, he established his illegitimate son Hegesistratus as a tyrant there, who was born from an Argive woman, and who did not hold what he received from Pisistratus without fighting. For the Mytilenaeans and the Athenians waged war for a long time, both attacking from the city of Achilleum and from Sigeum; the Mytilenaeans demanded the land, while the Athenians neither acknowledged nor demonstrated by argument that the Aeolians had any more share in the land of Ilium than they themselves and the other Greeks, as many as had joined Menelaus in avenging the abduction of Helen.
95. During their war, various things happened in the battles, and indeed, in one of them, the poet Alcaeus, when the Athenians were winning and an engagement occurred, he himself fled and escaped, but the Athenians held his weapons, and they hung them up in the Athenian temple in Sigeum. Alcaeus, having composed a song about these things, added it to Mytilene, announcing his own misfortune to a friend named Melanippus. Periander, the son of Cypselus, reconciled the Mytilenaeans and the Athenians; for they turned to him as an arbitrator, and he reconciled them in this way: each side was to possess what they had.
96. Sigeum, then, now came under the control of the Athenians. And Hippias, after arriving from Lacedaemon to Asia, stirred up every matter, slandering the Athenians to Artaphrenes and doing everything so that Athens might become subject to both himself and Darius. Indeed, Hippias was pressing these matters, and the Athenians, learning of this, sent messengers to Sardis, not allowing the Persians to be persuaded by the exiled Athenians. But Artaphrenes commanded them, if they wished to be safe, to receive Hippias back. The Athenians, however, did not accept the words being brought back, and since they did not accept them, it seemed right to them to be openly at war with the Persians.
97. But they think these things and are slandered to the Persians, and at this time indeed, the Milesian Aristagoras, having been expelled by Cleomenes the Lacedaemonian from Sparta, arrived in Athens: for this city of the remaining ones had the greatest power. And Aristagoras, having come to the people, spoke the same things as in Sparta concerning the good things in Asia and the Persian war, as they neither consider a shield nor a spear and would be easy to be handled. And indeed he spoke these things and in addition to them, as the Milesians are colonists of the Athenians, and it would be their duty to save them with great power: and there was nothing he did not promise as he was in great need, to which he persuaded them. For he thought it was much easier to deceive many than one, if indeed he was not able to deceive Cleomenes the Lacedaemonian alone, but he made thirty thousand Athenians do this. The Athenians then, having been persuaded, voted to send twenty ships to help the Ionians, having chosen Melanthius, a man of the citizens being altogether respectable, to be their admiral: and these ships became the beginning of evils for both Greeks and foreigners.
98. Aristagoras, having sailed forth and arrived in Miletus, found a plan from which no help was going to come to the Ionians, but he did it so that he might annoy King Darius. He sent a man to Phrygia to the Paeonians who had been made captives from the river Strymon by Megabazus and were dwelling in a part of Phrygia and a village of their own. When he arrived at the Paeonians, he said these things: "Men of Paeonia, Aristagoras, the tyrant of Miletus, sent me to offer you salvation, if you are willing to be persuaded. For now, all Ionia has revolted from the king, and it is possible for you to be saved by going to your own land; as far as the sea, we will provide for you, and from there on, it will be our concern." Hearing these things, the Paeonians were very glad and, taking their children and wives, they fled to the sea, while some of them remained behind out of fear. And when the Paeonians arrived at the sea, they crossed over to Chios. Already in Chios, a large force of Persian horsemen had come pursuing the Paeonians. But since they did not catch them, they sent a message to the Paeonians in Chios that they should return. The Paeonians, however, did not accept the words, but the Chians took them from Chios to Lesbos, and the Lesbians took them to Doriscus. From there, being conveyed by land, they arrived in Paeonia.
99. Aristagoras, when the Athenians arrived with their twenty ships, along with five triremes of the Eretrians, who were not waging war for the sake of the Athenians but for their own, repaying the debt owed to the Milesians: for indeed, the Milesians had previously helped the Eretrians in the war against the Chalcidians, at the time when the Samians were also helping the Chalcidians against the Eretrians and Milesians. So when these forces arrived and the other allies were present, Aristagoras made an expedition against Sardis. He himself, however, did not wage war but stayed in Miletus, and he appointed other generals to be of the Milesians, his own brother Charopinus and another citizen Hermophantus.
100. Arriving with this fleet, the Ionians came to Ephesus and left their ships at Coresus of the Ephesian territory, while they themselves went up with a large force, making the Ephesians leaders of the way. As they went along the Caicus River, and then crossed the Tmolus, they arrived and captured Sardis without anyone opposing them, capturing everything except the citadel: for Artaphrenes himself was defending the citadel, having a not insignificant force of men.
101. The reason they did not plunder the city after capturing it was this: there were houses in Sardis, most of which were made of reeds, and even those made of bricks had roofs of reeds. One of the soldiers set fire to one of these houses, and the fire immediately spread from house to house, engulfing the entire city. As the city burned, the Lydians and the Persians who were in the city, trapped on all sides by the fire that reached the outermost parts, and having no way out of the city, gathered in the marketplace and near the Pactolus River, which, carrying gold dust from Mount Tmolus, flowed through the middle of the marketplace and then emptied into the Hermus River, which in turn flowed into the sea. The Lydians and the Persians, gathering in the marketplace and near the Pactolus River, were forced to defend themselves. The Ionians, seeing some of the enemies defending themselves and a large number of others approaching, became afraid and retreated towards the mountain called Tmolus; from there, under the cover of night, they withdrew to their ships.
102. And Sardis was indeed set on fire, and within it, a temple of the local goddess Cybebe: the Persians, later using this as a pretext, set fire to the temples in Hellas. At that time, the Persians who held provinces within the Halys River, having learned of these events, gathered and came to the aid of the Lydians. And indeed, they found the Ionians no longer in Sardis, but following their tracks, they caught them in Ephesus. And the Ionians were arrayed against them, but engaging in battle, they were greatly defeated. And the Persians killed many of them, including other famous men, and indeed Eualcides, the general of the Eretrians, who had won crowns in the games and had been greatly praised by Simonides of Ceos. And those of them who escaped the battle were scattered throughout their cities.
103. Then indeed in this way they fought. But after, the Athenians, having completely left the Ionians, although Aristagoras called upon them many times through messengers, they did not say they would avenge them: the Ionians, having been deprived of the alliance of the Athenians, for thus it had been done to them with respect to Darius, no less prepared for the war against the king. And having sailed to the Hellespont, they made Byzantium and all the other cities in this region their own, and having sailed out from the Hellespont, they acquired for themselves the greater part of Caria to be their ally: for even Caunus, not wanting to be an ally earlier, when they had set fire to Sardis, then also joined them.
104. The Cyprians indeed willingly joined them all, except for the Amathusians: for they too revolted from the Medes in this way. Onesilus was the younger brother of Gorgus, the king of the Salaminians, and the son of Chersis, the son of Siromus, the son of Evelthon. This man had often before urged Gorgus to revolt from the king, but then, when he learned that the Ionians had revolted, he pressed him even more. But when he did not persuade Gorgus, Onesilus, having watched him go out of the city of the Salaminians, together with his own partisans, shut him out of the gates. Gorgus indeed, having been deprived of the city, fled to the Medes, but Onesilus ruled as king of Salamis and persuaded all the Cyprians to revolt together. He indeed persuaded the others, but the Amathusians, not wanting to be persuaded, he besieged, having settled down against them.
105. Onesilus, indeed, was besieging Amathus. But when it was reported to King Darius that Sardis had been captured and set on fire by the Athenians and Ionians, and that Aristagoras the Milesian had become the leader of the gathering so that these things were woven together, it is said that he, when he learned these things, made no account of the Ionians, knowing well that they would not escape punishment for their rebellion. He asked, however, who the Athenians were. And after learning, he asked for his bow, and taking it and fitting an arrow on it, he shot it upwards towards the sky, and as he shot it into the air, he said, "O Zeus, grant me to take vengeance on the Athenians." And having said this, he ordered one of his servants, when dinner was set before him, to say to him three times at each meal, "Master, remember the Athenians."
106. After giving this order, Darius called Histiaeus, the Milesian who had been with him for a long time, and said, "Histiaeus, I have learned that your deputy, whom you appointed in Miletus, has done new things against me: for he has brought men from the other continent, and with them Ionians who will give me satisfaction for what they have done, and having persuaded these to join him, he has deprived me of Sardis. Now then, how does it seem to you that this is well done? And how could anything of this kind have been done without your counsel? Take care lest you find yourself in trouble later." To this Histiaeus said, "O king, what kind of word have you spoken, that I would plan anything which would bring harm to you, either great or small? What could I be seeking to gain by doing this, being in need of nothing myself, and having all things which belong to you, and being thought worthy to hear all your counsels? But if my deputy is indeed doing such a thing as you say, know that he has done it for his own sake. However, I do not even accept the report that the Milesians and my deputy are doing anything new concerning your affairs. But if they are indeed doing something of this kind and you have heard the truth, O king, learn what a thing you have done by making me, who was living by the sea, to be drawn up from it. For the Ionians, when I was out of their sight, did that which they had long desired to do; and if I had been in Ionia, not one city would have stirred. Now then, as quickly as possible, let me go to Ionia, so that I may set all these things in order for you and deliver into your hands this deputy of Miletus who has devised these things. And having done this according to your mind, I swear by the gods of the royal house that I will not take off the tunic which I have on until I make Sardo, the largest of the islands, a tributary to you."
107. Histiaeus, indeed, saying these things, deceived Darius, and Darius was persuaded and let him go, having instructed him that, after he had accomplished the things he had promised, he should return to Susa.
108. While the message concerning Sardis was going to the king, and Darius having done the things about the bow allowed Histiaeus to go to the sea, during this whole time these things happened. Onesilus of Salamis, besieging the Amathusians, was informed that a large Persian force led by Artybius, a Persian man, was expected to be in Cyprus. Hearing this, Onesilus sent heralds to Ionia, calling upon them, and the Ionians, not deliberating for long, came with a large fleet. Indeed, the Ionians were present in Cyprus, and the Persians, crossing by ships from Cilicia, were going towards Salamis by land. And the Phoenicians were sailing around the headland called the Keys of Cyprus with their ships.
109. As this was happening, the tyrants of Cyprus, having summoned the generals of the Ionians, said, "Men of Ionia, we, the Cypriots, give you a choice of whom you wish to face, either the Persians or the Phoenicians. For if you desire to face the Persians on land, it would be time for you to disembark from your ships and arrange yourselves on foot, while we board your ships to oppose the Phoenicians. But if you would rather face the Phoenicians, it is necessary for you to do whichever of these you choose, so that both Ionia and Cyprus will be free." The Ionians responded to this, "The common council of the Ionians sent us to guard the sea, not to hand over our ships to the Cypriots and ourselves face the Persians on foot. Now, we will attempt to be useful in the way we were assigned. It is necessary for you, remembering the kind of suffering you endured while enslaved to the Medes, to become brave men."
110. The Ionians answered them thus, and after the Persians had come to the plain of Salamis, the kings of the Cypriots arranged their forces, positioning the other Cypriots against the other soldiers, and having chosen the best of the Salaminians and Solians, they set them against the Persians. Onesilus, willingly, took his position opposite Artybius, the general of the Persians.
111. Artybius rode a horse trained to stand upright against an infantryman. When Onesilus learned this, he spoke to his attendant, a brave Carian man who was highly esteemed in war and otherwise full of courage, and said to him, "I hear that Artybius' horse stands upright and works with its feet and mouth against whoever it is brought near. So, you decide and tell me at once which one you want to guard against and strike, either the horse or Artybius himself." His attendant replied to this, "O King, I am ready to do both or either of them, and certainly whatever you command. However, as it seems to me to be more suitable for your affairs, I will tell you. I say it is necessary for a king and general to face a king and general. For if you bring down a man who is a general, it is a great thing for you, and secondly, if he, may it not happen, brings you down, it is half a misfortune to die by a worthy hand. But for us, the attendants, it is appropriate to face other attendants and the horse. Do not fear its tricks; for I assure you that it will not stand against any man any longer."
112. He said these things, and immediately the armies mixed in battle on foot and by ships. Now indeed, the Ionians, becoming the best on that day, surpassed the Phoenicians in their ships, and of these, the Samians were the most excellent. On foot, however, as the armies came together, they fought in close combat. And concerning both generals, these things happened: as Artybius approached Onesilus, sitting on his horse, Onesilus, according to what he had agreed with his attendant, struck Artybius as he came near. And when the horse threw its legs upon the shield of Onesilus, at that moment, the Carian, striking with a curved sword, cut off the legs of the horse.
113. Thus indeed, Artybius, the general of the Persians, fell together with his horse in this manner. And as the others were fighting, Stesenor, being the ruler of Curium, betrayed with a not small force of men around himself. And these Curians are said to be colonists of the Argives. And as the Curians betrayed, immediately also the war-chariots of the Salaminians did the same as the Curians. And as these things were happening, the Persians were superior to the Cyprians. And as the army was defeated, many others fell, and indeed also Onesilus, the son of Chersis, who had brought about the rebellion of the Cyprians, and the king of the Solians, Aristocyprus, the son of Philocyprus. And this Philocyprus was the one whom Solon, the Athenian, arriving in Cyprus, praised in verses, especially among rulers.
114. Now indeed, the Amathusians, because Onesilus had besieged them, having cut off his head, carried it to Amathus and hung it above the gates. And as the head was hanging and already being hollow, a swarm of bees entered it and filled it with honeycomb. And when such a thing happened, for the Amathusians were concerned about it, it was divined for them to bury the head having taken it down, and to sacrifice to Onesilus as to a hero every year, and by doing these things, it would be better for them to live together.
115. The Amathusians indeed now did these things and continued until my time: The Ionians, however, who fought the naval battle in Cyprus, after they learned that the affairs of Onesilus had been ruined and the other cities of the Cypriots were besieged, except for Salamis, which was handed over to Gorgus, the former king, by the Salaminians, immediately upon learning these things, the Ionians sailed away to Ionia. Of the cities in Cyprus, Soli held out the longest time besieged, and the Persians captured it in the fifth month by digging a tunnel around the wall.
116. The Cyprians, indeed having become free for a year, were once again enslaved. Daurises, both Hymaees and Otanes, other Persian generals, having daughters of Darius, pursuing the Ionians who had campaigned to Sardis and having driven them into their ships, as they prevailed in the battle, then dividing the cities among themselves, they laid waste.
117. Daurises, turning towards the cities in the Hellespont, captured Dardanus, and captured Abydus, and Percote, and Lampsacus, and Paesus. He captured these each on a single day, and from Paesus, as he was driving towards the city of Parium, a message came that the Carians, having the same thought as the Ionians, had revolted from the Persians. So, turning away from the Hellespont, he led his army towards Caria.
118. And somehow this news reached the Carians before Daurises arrived: and upon hearing it, the Carians gathered at the so-called White Pillars and the Marsyas River, which flows from the Idria region into the Maeander River. And when the Carians had gathered there, many other plans were discussed, and the one that seemed best to me was that of Pixodarus, the son of Mausolus, a man from Cindya, who had the daughter of Syennesis, the king of Cilicia, as his wife. This man's plan was for the Carians to cross the Maeander River and fight with the river at their back, so that the Carians, having no way to retreat, would be forced to stand their ground and become even braver than their nature. However, this plan did not prevail, but rather the decision was made for the Persians to have the Maeander River at their back, rather than the Carians themselves, meaning that if the Persians were to flee and be defeated in battle, they would not be able to escape by falling back into the river.
119. After the Persians arrived and crossed the Maeander River, the Carians met them at the Marsyas River and fought a strong and lengthy battle. In the end, they were defeated due to the multitude of Persians. Indeed, two thousand Persians fell, and ten thousand Carians. Then, the survivors among them were driven to Labraunda, to the sanctuary of Zeus of Armies, a large and sacred grove of plane trees. The Carians alone, of those we know, offer sacrifices to Zeus of Armies. So, having been driven there, they deliberated about their salvation, whether it would be better to surrender themselves to the Persians or to abandon Asia altogether.
120. While they were deliberating these matters, the Milesians and their allies came to their aid. At this point, the Carians abandoned their previous plans and began to prepare for war anew. And when they engaged with the Persians, they were defeated even more than before. Of all those who fell, the Milesians were struck the most severely.
121. After this wound, the Carians both recovered and fought again: for learning that the Persians were preparing to march upon their cities, they ambushed the road at Pedasus, into which falling, the Persians were destroyed by night, both themselves and their generals Daurises, Amorges, and Sisimaces; and with them also died Myrsus, the son of Gyges. The leader of this ambush was Heraclides, the son of Ibanollis, a man of Mylasa.
122. These Persians indeed thus perished: Hymaees, however, himself being one of those who pursued the Ionians that had marched to Sardis, turning to the Propontis, captured Cius in Mysia. Having taken this, as he learned that Daurises had left the Hellespont and was marching upon Caria, leaving the Propontis, he led his army to the Hellespont, and he captured all the Aeolians who inhabit the Ilium region, and he captured the Gergithae, who were left behind of the ancient Teucrians. Hymaees himself, while capturing these nations, met his end by disease in the Troad.
123. This man indeed thus met his end, and Artaphrenes, the governor of Sardis, and Otanes, the third general, were appointed to lead the army against Ionia and the neighboring Aeolian region. Now, in Ionia, they captured Clazomenae, and in Aeolia, they captured Cyme.
124. As the cities were being captured, it was clear that Aristagoras of Miletus was not a man of great courage, who had stirred up Ionia and involved himself in great affairs, and now he was devising a plan of escape, seeing these things. And it seemed to him impossible to overcome King Darius. Therefore, he called together his fellow conspirators and consulted with them, saying that it would be better for them to have some place of refuge ready, if indeed they were driven out of Miletus, whether they should go from this place to a colony in Sardo, or to Myrcinus of the Edonians, which Histiaeus had fortified, having received it as a gift from Darius. Aristagoras asked these things.
125. Now, the opinion of Hecataeus, the son of Hegesander, a man of words, did not favor sending to either of these places, but rather, having built a stronghold on the island of Leros, to live in peace, if he should be driven out of Miletus; and then, setting out from there, to attempt to return to Miletus.
126. Hecataeus indeed advised these things, but for Aristagoras himself, the strongest opinion was to lead (them) to Myrcinus. He indeed entrusted Miletus to Pythagoras, a man esteemed among the citizens, and he himself, taking along everyone who wanted (to join), sailed to Thrace, and he took possession of the land for which he was sent. Setting out from there, Aristagoras himself and his army were destroyed by the Thracians, besieging a city and (while) the Thracians were willing to leave under a truce.