1. And Mardonius, when Alexander returned and reported to him the message from the Athenians, set out eagerly from Thessaly and led his army towards Athens. And wherever he went, he took along those people. But the leaders of Thessaly, neither regretting their previous actions nor much more urging on the Persian, both accompanied Thorax the Larisaean, who had helped Xerxes flee and then openly brought Mardonius into Hellas.
2. And when the army, marching, arrived in Boeotia, the Thebans took hold of Mardonius and advised him, saying that there was no more suitable place for him to encamp, nor to go elsewhere, but to stay there and make it so that all of Hellas would be overthrown without a fight. For indeed, they said, it was difficult to overcome the Greeks united in strength, who had previously known the same things, and for all people: "But if you do what we advise," they said, "you will have all their strong plans effortlessly: send money to the powerful men in the cities, and by sending, you will divide Hellas; and then you will easily overthrow those who do not share your views, with the help of your supporters."
3. The Thebans indeed advised these things, but he did not listen; instead, a great desire had come upon him to capture Athens a second time, both due to his stubbornness and because he thought to show the king in Sardis that he had Athens by means of beacon fires through the islands. And when he arrived in Attica, he did not find the Athenians there, but he learned that most of them were in Salamis and on the ships, and he captured the deserted city. The king's capture, however, became ten months later than Mardonius's campaign.
4. When Mardonius came to Athens, he sent a man named Murychides from Hellespont to Salamis, carrying the same message that Alexander the Macedonian had previously conveyed to the Athenians. He sent this message a second time, not holding friendly thoughts towards the Athenians, but hoping that they would yield to their stubbornness, as their Attic land was now occupied by the spear and under his control.
5. For these reasons, Mardonius sent Murychides to Salamis, and upon arriving, he spoke to the council about Mardonius's proposal. Lycidas, one of the council members, expressed his opinion that it would be better to accept the proposal brought by Murychides and present it to the people. He said this either because he had received money from Mardonius or because he genuinely liked the idea. However, the Athenians in the council were immediately outraged, as were those who heard about it later. They surrounded Lycidas and stoned him to death, while they allowed Murychides, the man from Hellespont, to leave unharmed. There was a great commotion in Salamis concerning Lycidas, and when the Athenian women found out what had happened, they urged each other to join them, and they went to Lycidas's house and stoned his wife and children to death.
6. The Athenians crossed over to Salamis in this manner. While they were waiting for an army from the Peloponnese to come to their aid, they remained in Attica. But when the Peloponnesians took longer and acted more leisurely, and the invaders were said to be already in Boeotia, they then indeed carried away everything and themselves crossed over to Salamis. They also sent messengers to Lacedaemon, both to reproach the Lacedaemonians for having allowed the barbarian to invade Attica and not having met them together in Boeotia, and to remind them of the promises the Persian had made to give them if they changed sides, and to declare that if they did not come to the aid of the Athenians, they would find some other means of salvation.
7. For indeed, the Lacedaemonians were celebrating the Hyacinthia at that time, and they held the honoring of the god in the highest regard. At the same time, they were building a wall for themselves on the Isthmus, and it was already taking shape. When the messengers from Athens arrived in Lacedaemon, along with messengers from Megara and Plataea, they went to the ephors and said the following: "The Athenians have sent us, saying that the king of the Medes offers to give us back our land, and he wishes to make us his allies on equal and like terms, without deceit or treachery, and he is also willing to give us another land in addition to our own, whichever we may choose. But we, out of respect for Zeus the Hellenic and out of great concern for betraying Greece, did not consent but refused, even though we have been wronged by the Greeks and betrayed, and knowing that it is more profitable to agree with the Persian rather than to wage war. Yet we will not willingly consent to this. And so, our position is thus made clear to the Greeks." "But you, arriving at the height of cowardice when we do not make a deal with the Persian, now that you have clearly learned our intention, that we will never betray Greece, and because the wall being driven through the Isthmus is at its end, and indeed you make no account of the Athenians, having agreed with us to oppose the Persian in Boeotia, you have abandoned us and allowed the barbarian to advance into Attica. For the present, the Athenians are angry with you, for you have not acted properly. But now they have ordered you to send an army with us as quickly as possible, so that we may receive the barbarian in Attica. For since we have missed Boeotia, it is most fitting for us to fight in our own territory, the Thriasian plain."
8. When the ephors heard these things, they did not respond immediately, but postponed their answer to the next day, and then to the day after that. They continued this for ten days, delaying their response from day to day. In the meantime, all the Peloponnesians were busily fortifying the Isthmus with great effort, and they were close to completion. I cannot say for certain why, when Alexander of Macedonia arrived in Athens, they had made a great effort to prevent the Athenians from siding with the Persians, but now they showed no concern. Perhaps it was because the Isthmus had been fortified and they no longer thought they needed the Athenians. However, when Alexander arrived in Attica, the wall was not yet completed, and they were greatly concerned about the Persians.
9. The conclusion of both the response and the departure of the Spartans occurred in the following manner. On the day before the last assembly, which was about to take place, Chileus, a man from Tegea, who had great influence among the Lacedaemonians, inquired from the ephors about the entire account that the Athenians had spoken. Upon hearing this, Chileus then said to them these words: "Thus it is, men of the ephors: with the Athenians not being on our side but being allies of the barbarians, even though a strong wall has been built across the Isthmus, great encampments will be easily set up in the Peloponnese for the Persian. But listen, before the Athenians make any other decision that may bring harm to Hellas."
10. Chileus advised them of this, and they, taking the matter to heart immediately, without informing the envoys who had come from the cities, sent out by night 5,000 Spartans, assigning seven helots to each, and ordering Pausanias, son of Cleombrotus, to lead them. The leadership indeed belonged to Pleistarchus, son of Leonidas, but he was still a child, and Pausanias was both his guardian and cousin. For Cleombrotus, father of Pausanias and son of Anaxandridas, was no longer alive, but after leading the army away from the Isthmus and building the wall, he died not long after. Cleombrotus had led the army away from the Isthmus for this reason: while he was sacrificing for victory over the Persians, the sun became dimmed in the sky. Pausanias chose for himself Euryanax, son of Dorieus, a man of the same family, as his partner.
11. The ones with Pausanias had indeed gone out from Sparta, but the envoys, knowing nothing about the expedition, came to the ephors as the day began, each intending to return to their own city. And coming, they said these things: "You, Lacedaemonians, stay here celebrating the Hyacinthia and playing, having abandoned your allies. The Athenians, being wronged by you, will make peace with the Persians in whatever way they can. And having made peace, it is clear that we will become allies of the king, and we will march against whichever land they lead us to. And you will learn from this what sort of thing comes out for you." As the envoys were saying these things, the ephors said, swearing an oath, that they believed their army was already at Orestheum, marching against the foreigners. For they called the barbarians foreigners. And the envoys, not knowing, asked about the matter being said, and having asked, they learned the whole truth, so that they went away in amazement, following as quickly as possible. And with them, 5,000 hoplite soldiers of the Lacedaemonian neighbors were doing the same thing.
12. They indeed were hastening to the Isthmus. But the Argives, as soon as they learned that those with Pausanias had gone out from Sparta, sent a herald, finding the best of the day-runners, to Attica, having first promised Mardonius that they would hold the Spartan and not let him go out. And when he arrived in Athens, he said these things: "Mardonius, the Argives sent me to tell you that the youth have gone out from Lacedaemon, and the Argives are not able to hold them and not let them go out. In regard to these things, happen to be well-advised."
13. The messenger indeed spoke these things and then departed, but Mardonius was by no means eager any longer to remain in Attica when he heard this. Before now, he had been delaying, wanting to know what the Athenians would do, and he neither attacked nor invaded the land of Attica, always hoping that they would come to an agreement with him. But when he could not persuade them and learned the whole story, before those with Pausanias could enter the Isthmus, he retreated, setting fire to Athens and, if anything of the walls or the houses or the temples was still standing, tearing it all down and leveling it. He drove them out for these reasons: because Attica was not suitable for horses, and if he were to engage in battle and be defeated, there was no escape except through a narrow passage, so that a few men could hold them off. Therefore, he planned to retreat to Thebes and engage in battle, with a friendly city behind him and a land suitable for horses.
14. Mardonius indeed began to retreat, and while on the road, another message came to him that an additional force had arrived at Megara, a thousand Lacedaemonians. Hearing this, he planned, wanting somehow to capture these first. Turning back the army, he led them towards Megara, and the cavalry, having advanced, invaded the Megarian land. Indeed, this was the farthest point in Europe that this Persian army reached, towards the setting of the sun.
15. After these things, a message came to Mardonius that the Greeks were gathered at the Isthmus. Thus, he indeed marched back through Decelea. For the Boeotian leaders had sent for the nearby Asopian residents, and these led him on the road to Sphendaleae, and from there to Tanagra. Having camped in Tanagra for the night, and turning on the next day to Scolus in the land of the Thebans, he was there. In this place, although the Thebans were siding with the Medes, he cut down their lands, not out of hatred for them, but being driven by a great necessity to make a stronghold for his army, and if it should happen that the battle did not turn out as he wished, he made this a place of refuge. He extended his camp from Erythrae, past Hysiae, and down to the land of Plataea, positioned along the Asopus river. However, the wall he built was not so large; each side was about ten furlongs long at most.
16. While the barbarians were occupied with this labor, Attaginus, a Theban man, son of Phrynon, having prepared greatly, invited Mardonius himself and fifty of the most distinguished Persians to a feast. These men, having been invited, followed; and the dinner was prepared in Thebes. I heard the following from Thersander, a man of Orchomenus, who was among the first in reputation in Orchomenus. Thersander said that he himself was invited by Attaginus to this dinner, and that fifty Theban men were invited as well, and that they were not given separate couches, but a Persian and a Theban were on each couch. When they were done with dinner and drinking, the Persian who shared the couch, speaking in the Greek language, asked him from where he was, and he replied that he was from Orchomenus. Then the Persian said, "Since now you are my table companion and my ally, I want to leave you a memorial of my opinion, so that you yourself, having foreknowledge, may have the power to take counsel about your own interests. You see these Persians who are feasting and the army that we left encamped by the river: of all these you will see, in a short time, only a few surviving." Saying this, the Persian shed many tears. Thersander himself, having marveled at the speech, said to him, "Is it not necessary, then, to say these things to Mardonius and to the Persians who are in authority with him?" After this, the Persian said, "Stranger, it is impossible for a man to avert what must come from the god; for no one is willing to believe even trustworthy things. Many of us Persians know these things and follow, bound by necessity; and this is the most hateful pain among men, to have much understanding and no power." I heard these things from Thersander of Orchomenus, and these things in addition to them, that he himself immediately told these things to men before they happened, rather than after the battle at Plataea.
17. While Mardonius was encamped in Boeotia, all the other Greeks in the area who supported the Persians provided soldiers and joined Mardonius in attacking Athens, except for the Phocians. For they sided with the Persians more out of necessity than willingness. A few days after the Persians arrived in Thebes, a thousand Phocian soldiers led by Harmocydes, a prominent figure, also arrived. When the Phocians were in Thebes, Mardonius sent horsemen to order them to stand separately on the plain. After they did so, the entire Persian cavalry appeared, and rumors spread throughout the Greek army and among the Phocians that Mardonius planned to kill them with javelins. Hearing this, their leader Harmocydes encouraged them, saying, "Men of Phocis, since death seems inevitable at the hands of these people (likely due to the Thessalians' accusations), it's time for each of you to be brave. It's better to die fighting than to suffer a shameful death. Let's show them that the men they plan to kill are true Greeks." With these words, he motivated them.
18. As he encouraged them thus, the horsemen, having surrounded them, charged as if to destroy them, and indeed they stretched their weapons as if to shoot, and perhaps someone even let loose. And they stood against them, having turned themselves all around and having closed ranks as much as possible. At that point, the horsemen turned back and rode away. I cannot say for certain whether they came to destroy the Phocians at the request of the Thessalians, but when they saw them turning to defend themselves, they feared that they might also suffer wounds, and so they rode away; for Mardonius had instructed them thus: or whether he wanted to try them to see if they had any courage. But as the horsemen rode away, Mardonius, having sent a herald, said these things: "Take courage, O Phocians, for you have appeared to be good men, not as I had inquired. And now, bear this war eagerly, for you will not surpass either me or the king in good deeds." The matter concerning the Phocians indeed came to this point.
19. When the Lacedaemonians came to the Isthmus, they encamped there. The other Peloponnesians, who favored the better cause, seeing the Spartans setting out, decided not to be left behind in the expedition of the Lacedaemonians. So, from the Isthmus, having received favorable omens from the sacrifices, they all set out and arrived at Eleusis. Having performed sacrifices there as well and receiving favorable omens, they continued their journey, and the Athenians joined them, having crossed over from Salamis and met them at Eleusis. When they arrived at Erythrae in Boeotia, they learned that the barbarians were encamped by the Asopus river. Having been informed of this, they arrayed themselves opposite the enemy on the lower slopes of Cithaeron.
20. Mardonius, however, as the Greeks did not descend into the plain, sent against them all the cavalry, with Masistius in command, who was highly esteemed among the Persians, whom the Greeks call Macistius, having a Nesaean horse with a golden bit and otherwise beautifully adorned. There, as the horsemen charged against the Greeks, they attacked in groups, and while attacking, they caused great harm and called them women.
21. By chance, the Megarians happened to be positioned in the most vulnerable part of the entire area, and the access for the cavalry was especially possible there. So, as the cavalry attacked, the Megarians, being oppressed, sent a herald to the generals of the Greeks, and the herald, coming to them, said the following: "The Megarians say: We, fellow men, are not able to withstand the Persian cavalry alone, having this position from the beginning we have stood: but we also persist in this with endurance and valor, although being oppressed. Now, if you do not send some others as successors of the position, know that we will abandon the position." He indeed reported these things to them, but Pausanias attempted to find out if any of the other Greeks would be willing to go voluntarily into this place and be positioned as successors to the Megarians. However, as none of the others were willing, the Athenians undertook it, and 300 chosen Athenians, of whom Olympiodorus, the son of Lampon, was the leader.
22. These were the ones who volunteered and were positioned at Erythrae in front of the other Greeks present, with the archers approaching. And as they fought for a time, the end of the battle happened in this way: with the cavalry attacking in groups, the horse of Masistius, leading the others, was struck by an arrow in the side, and feeling pain, it stood upright and threw off Masistius. And as he fell, the Athenians immediately rushed upon him. Indeed, they captured his horse and killed him as he defended himself, at first not being able to do so. For he was equipped in this way: he had a golden-scaled cuirass inside, and above the cuirass, he had put on a purple tunic. And as they struck at the cuirass, they did nothing, until indeed someone, having learned what was happening, struck him in the eye. Thus indeed he fell and died. And these things happening somehow escaped the notice of the other horsemen: for they did not see him fall from the horse nor dying, and as they retreated and turned back, they did not learn what was happening. But when they stopped, they immediately missed him, and having learned what had happened, they all drove their horses, giving orders, so that they might recover the dead body.
23. Seeing, however, the Athenians no longer being charged by the horsemen in groups but by all at once, they called upon the rest of the army. While the entire infantry came to their aid, a fierce battle took place over the dead body. As long as only the three hundred were there, they were greatly pressed and left the dead body behind; but when the multitude came to their assistance, the horsemen could no longer withstand them, nor could they manage to recover the dead body, but lost even more of their own horsemen in the process. So, having retreated about two furlongs, they deliberated what they ought to do: and it seemed to them, with no leader present, to drive back to Mardonius.
24. When the cavalry arrived at the camp, both the entire army and Mardonius experienced great sorrow for the loss of Masistius. They expressed their grief by cutting their own hair, as well as the hair of their horses and pack animals, and using an unceasing wail. For the sound filled all of Boeotia, as they had lost a man who was most esteemed among the Persians and the king, after Mardonius.
25. Now the barbarians honored the dead Masistius in their own way; and the Greeks, having received the attacking horse and repelling them, were much more encouraged, and first they placed the dead body on a cart and carried it along the ranks; the dead body was indeed worthy of a spectacle because of its size and beauty, for which they did these things: leaving their ranks, they went to see Masistius. Then it seemed good to them to go down to Plataea; for the place seemed much more suitable for them to encamp, the Plataean rather than the Erythraean, both in other respects and because it was better watered. To this place, then, and to the Gargaphian spring which was in this region, it seemed necessary for them to arrive and, having been arranged, to encamp. And taking up their arms, they went through the foothills of Cithaeron, past Hysiae to the land of Plataea, and arriving, they were arranged by nation near the Gargaphian spring and the precinct of Androcrates the hero, through low hills and a flat region.
26. During the arrangement of the battle lines, a dispute arose between the Tegeans and the Athenians, as both claimed the right to hold the second wing of the army. They justified their claims with stories of past and recent accomplishments. The Tegeans spoke first, explaining that they had always held this position in all united Peloponnesian campaigns, both ancient and recent, ever since the Heraclidae tried to return to the Peloponnese after Eurystheus' death. They earned this right due to a particular achievement they shared. When they joined the Achaeans and Ionians at the Isthmus for war and faced the returning exiles, Hyllus proposed that instead of risking both armies in battle, he would fight in single combat against the best champion chosen by the Peloponnesians. The Peloponnesians agreed, and they swore that if Hyllus won, the Heraclidae would return to their homeland, but if he lost, they would leave and not attempt to return for a hundred years. Echemus, the Tegean general and king, volunteered and was chosen from all the allies. He fought and killed Hyllus in the duel. As a result, the Peloponnesians granted the Tegeans the right to lead the second wing of the army in all united campaigns, along with other great privileges. The Tegeans acknowledged that they had no rivalry with the Lacedaemonians and allowed them to choose the command of whichever wing they wanted. However, they insisted that their place was at the head of the other wing, as it had always been. They argued that they were more deserving than the Athenians to hold that position, as they had fought many successful battles for the Lacedaemonians and others. They believed that their accomplishments, both past and recent, made them more qualified than the Athenians to hold the second wing.
27. The Athenians responded to the Tegeans' words, saying that they believed they were gathered for battle, not for speeches. However, since the Tegean had spoken about their past and recent accomplishments, the Athenians felt the need to prove why they deserved the place of honor more than the Arcadians. The Athenians reminded them that when the Heraclidae were rejected by every Greek people to escape the tyranny of the Mycenaeans, they alone welcomed them. Together, they defeated those who inhabited the Peloponnese and overcame Eurystheus' pride. They also mentioned their support for the Argives who had marched with Polynices against Thebes, and how they sent their army to recover and bury the dead in Eleusis. They recalled their victory against the Amazons who invaded Attica and their significant role in the Trojan War. However, the Athenians acknowledged that past accomplishments might not reflect the present, as people can change over time. They argued that even if they had no achievements to their name (though they had more than any other Greeks), they still deserved the honor because of their role at Marathon. They were the only Greeks who faced the Persians singlehandedly and defeated forty-six nations. They believed that this alone should grant them the right to hold the post. Despite this, the Athenians recognized that it was not the time for arguments about their position in the battle. They were willing to follow the Lacedaemonians' orders and take whatever place and face whatever enemy they deemed appropriate. They assured the Lacedaemonians that they would strive to be valiant men wherever they were placed and would obey their commands.
28. The Athenians responded thus, and the whole army of the Lacedaemonians loudly declared that the Athenians were more deserving to hold the wing than the Arcadians. And so, the Athenians obtained this and surpassed the Tegeans. After this, the Greeks who had come to help and those who had come at first were arranged in this way. The right wing was held by ten thousand Lacedaemonians; of these, five thousand were Spartans, who were guarded by lightly armed helots, thirty-five thousand in number, with seven assigned to each man. The Spartans chose the Tegeans to stand next to them, both for honor and for their valor; of these, there were one thousand five hundred hoplites. After these stood five thousand Corinthians, and next to them were three hundred Potidaeans from Pallene, who had been chosen to stand by Pausanias. Following these were six hundred Arcadians from Orchomenus, then three thousand Sicyonians, eight hundred Epidaurians, one thousand Troezenians, two hundred Lepreans, four hundred from Mycenae and Tiryns, one thousand Phliasians, three hundred Hermionians, six hundred Eretrians and Styreans, four hundred Chalcidians, five hundred Ambraciots, eight hundred Leucadians and Anactorians, two hundred from Pale in Cephallenia, five hundred Aeginetans, three thousand Megarians, and six hundred Plataeans. Lastly and firstly, the Athenians were arranged, holding the left wing, eight thousand in number; and their general was Aristides, son of Lysimachus.
29. These, except for the seven assigned to each Spartan, were hoplites, being in total a number of thirty-eight thousand and seven hundred. These were the hoplites gathered to fight against the barbarians, and there was this number of light-armed soldiers: of the Spartan force, five thousand and thirty thousand men, as there were seven for each man, and all of these were attached as if for war; the light-armed soldiers of the rest of the Lacedaemonians and Greeks, being one for each man, were five hundred and four thousand and thirty thousand.
30. Indeed, the total number of all the light-armed soldiers who were fighters was six myriads and nine thousand and five hundred, and the whole of the Greek force that had come together at Plataea, both hoplites and light-armed soldiers who were fighters, was eleven myriads, lacking one thousand, and with an addition of eight hundred men. And with the Thespians who were present, the eleven myriads were completed: for there were also Thespians in the camp who had survived, numbering eight hundred and one thousand; but they did not have arms. These men, then, having been arrayed by the Asopus, were encamped.
31. The barbarians with Mardonius, when they had finished mourning for Masistius, came, having learned that the Greeks were in Plataea, and they themselves were by the Asopus river that flows there. And arriving, they were arrayed thus by Mardonius: he stationed the Persians against the Lacedaemonians. And indeed, for the Persians were much more numerous in multitude, they were arranged in more ranks and extended to the Tegeans. He arranged them in this way: he chose all that was strongest of them and stationed it opposite the Lacedaemonians, and the weaker he placed against the Tegeans. He did these things while being advised and taught by the Thebans. Next to the Persians, he placed the Medes, and they held the Corinthians and Potidaeans and Orchomenians and Sicyonians. Next to the Medes, he placed the Bactrians, and they held the Epidaurians and Troezenians and Lepreans and Tirynthians and Mycenaeans and Phliasians. After the Bactrians, he stationed the Indians, and they held the Hermionians and Eretrians and Styrians and Chalcidians. Next to the Indians, he placed the Sacae, who held the Ampraciots and Anactorians and Leucadians and Paleans and Aeginetans. Next to the Sacae, he placed opposite the Athenians and Plataeans and Megarians the Boeotians and Locrians and Malians and Thessalians and the thousand Phocians: for not all the Phocians medized, but some of them and they increased the fortunes of the Greeks, having occupied Mount Parnassus, and from there they set out and carried and led both Mardonius' army and the Greeks who were with him. And he also placed the Macedonians and those dwelling around Thessaly against the Athenians.
32. These, indeed, were the greatest nations named among those arranged by Mardonius, which were both most conspicuous and of the greatest account: and there were also men of other nations mingled with them, both Phrygians and Thracians and Mysians and Paeonians and the rest, and also Ethiopians and Egyptians who are called Hermotybians and Calasirians, bearing swords, who alone are fighting men of the Egyptians. These, still being at Phalerum, he disembarked from the ships, being embarked: for the Egyptians were not arranged in the infantry that came with Xerxes to Athens. Of the barbarians, indeed, there were thirty myriads, as has also been declared before: but of the Greeks who were allies of Mardonius, no one knows the number: for they were not counted: but as to conjecture, I suppose that they were collected to the amount of five myriads. These were the infantry that was arranged, and the cavalry was arranged separately.
33. As, indeed, all had been arranged by nations and by battalions, thereupon on the second day both sides performed sacrifices. For the Greeks, Tisamenus, son of Antiochus, was the one performing the sacrifices; for this man was a diviner who followed this army, being an Elean and of the Iamid clan of the Clytiad family. The Lacedaemonians made him a citizen of their own. For when Tisamenus was divining at Delphi about having children, the Pythia declared that he would achieve five great victories. He, misunderstanding the oracle, devoted himself to athletic training, thinking he would win athletic contests. And having practiced the Five Contests, he ran to win the Olympic prize in wrestling, coming into conflict with Hieronymus of Andros. But the Lacedaemonians, learning that Tisamenus' prophecy referred not to athletic but to martial contests, tried to persuade Tisamenus with a reward to become a leader in their wars together with the kings of the Heracleidae. He, seeing the Spartans greatly desired to add him as a friend, raised his demands, indicating to them that if they would make him a citizen of their own, sharing all things, he would do these things, but for no other reward. The Spartans, at first hearing this, were angry and abandoned the request altogether, but finally, with a great fear of the Persian army hanging over them, they yielded. He, knowing they had been persuaded, still said he was not satisfied with these things alone, but it was necessary for his brother Hegias to also become a Spartan citizen on the same terms as he himself would become.
34. In saying these things, this man was imitating Melampus, as one might compare the demands for kingship and citizenship. For indeed, when the women in Argos were going mad, the Argives hired Melampus from Pylos to stop their own women from the disease, and he demanded half of the kingship as payment. But the Argives, not enduring this, went away; however, when more of the women were going mad, they yielded to what Melampus had demanded and were going to give him these things. Then, indeed, he pressed further, seeing them persuaded, saying that unless they also give a third part of the kingship to his brother Bias, he would not do what they wanted. And the Argives, being threatened into a tight spot, agreed to this as well.
35. Thus indeed the Spartans, for they were in great need of Tisamenus, agreed to everything he asked. And when the Spartans had granted these things, Tisamenus, the Elean, thus indeed, having become a Spartan, helped them win five great contests by performing divination for them. These men alone, of all people, became citizens of Sparta. And these five contests were as follows: the first and foremost was the one at Plataea; then the one at Tegea against both the Tegeans and the Argives; after that, the one at Dipaea against all the Arcadians except the Mantineans; then the one against the Messenians at Ithome; and lastly, the one at Tanagra against both the Athenians and the Argives. This last one was the final victory of the five contests.
36. At that time, Tisamenus, brought by the Spartans, indeed served as the diviner for the Greeks at Plataea. Now, for the Greeks, the sacrifices turned out well when they were defending themselves, but if they crossed the Asopus river and began the battle, they would not.
37. But for Mardonius, when he was eager to begin the battle, the sacrifices were not favorable, but for him defending himself, they were good. For he also used Greek sacrifices, having as a diviner Hegesistratus, a man from Elis and the most distinguished of the sons of Tellias, whom the Spartans had previously taken and bound for death, as they had suffered much and lawless things from him. And he, being in this misfortune, so that he was running for his life and before death persuaded of many and terrible things, accomplished a deed greater than speech. For indeed, being bound in an iron-bound wooden stock, having somehow gotten hold of iron, he overpowered it, and immediately contrived the most manly deed of all that we know: for having measured how he would get out the rest of his foot, he cut off his own ankle. And having done these things, as being guarded by guards, having dug through the wall, he fled to Tegea, traveling during the nights, and during the days sinking down into the forest and resting, thus as the Lacedaemonians were searching for him in every way, on the third day he came to be in Tegea, and they were held in great wonder of the boldness, seeing the half-cut foot lying there, and they were not able to find him. Then indeed, having thus escaped the Lacedaemonians, he took refuge in Tegea, which was not in alliance with the Lacedaemonians at that time. And having become healthy and having made a wooden foot, he stood forth from the straight path as an enemy to the Lacedaemonians. However, his hatred towards the Lacedaemonians did not last to the end: for he was captured while divining in Zacynthus by them and died.
38. However, the death of Hegesistratus occurred later than the events at Plataea. At that time, he was near the Asopus river, having been hired by Mardonius for no small fee. He both sacrificed and eagerly worked, driven by both the hatred for the Lacedaemonians and the desire for profit. But as neither the Persians nor the Greeks with them were able to obtain favorable omens for battle (for they also had their own diviner, Hippomachus of Leucas, a man), and as more Greeks were flowing in and becoming numerous, Timagenides, son of Herpys, a Theban man, advised Mardonius to guard the exits of Cithaeron, saying that the Greeks were always flowing in every day and that he would cut off many of them.
39. For eight days they had been encamped opposite each other when he advised Mardonius of this. And when he learned that the advice was good, he became cheerful and sent the cavalry to the outlets of Cithaeron which lead to Plataea, which the Boeotians call Three Heads and the Athenians call Oak Heads. And the horsemen, having been sent, did not arrive in vain: for they caught five hundred draft animals entering the plain, carrying provisions from the Peloponnese to the camp, and men who followed the teams. And having captured this prey, the Persians killed without sparing, sparing neither any draft animal nor any man. And when they had enough of killing, they drove the rest of them, surrounding them, both to Mardonius and to the camp.
40. After this deed, they spent two more days, neither side wishing to begin the battle: for the barbarians indeed went as far as the Asopus river, trying the Greeks, but neither side crossed. However, Mardonius' cavalry always pressed upon and troubled the Greeks: for the Thebans, being greatly in favor of the Medes, eagerly carried on the war and always led up to the battle, and from this point on, the Persians and Medes who showed their valor took over.
41. Up to now, for ten days, nothing more than this had happened: but when the eleventh day had come, and they were sitting opposite each other in Plataea, the Greeks had become much more numerous, and Mardonius was annoyed by their position. At this point, Mardonius, the son of Gobryas, and Artabazus, the son of Pharnaces, who was among the few Persians considered a worthy man by Xerxes, came to discuss. These were their opinions: Artabazus thought it was necessary to quickly withdraw the entire army and go to the wall of the Thebans, where much food had been brought for them and fodder for their draft animals, and while sitting quietly, to accomplish these things: for they had much gold, both marked and unmarked, and much silver and drink; sparing none of these, they should send them to the Greeks, especially to the leaders in the cities, and soon they would deliver their freedom; and not to risk a battle. This was also the opinion of the Thebans, as they had foreseen something more than this. But Mardonius' opinion was stronger and more reckless, and not at all in agreement: for he thought their army was much better than the Greek one, and they should engage in battle as soon as possible, and not overlook the fact that even more Greeks were gathering than those who had gathered; and they should not force the sacrifices of Hegesistratus, but, following the custom of the Persians, they should engage in battle.
42. No one, however, opposed Mardonius' argument, so his opinion prevailed: for he held the command of the army from the king, not Artabazus. Therefore, having summoned the battalion leaders of the Persians and the generals of the Greeks who were with him, he asked if they knew any oracle concerning the Persians, that they would be destroyed in Greece. But as the summoned ones were silent, some not knowing the oracles, and others knowing but not daring to speak, Mardonius himself said, 'Since you either know nothing or do not dare to speak, I will tell you, being well aware: there is an oracle that the Persians, having come to Greece, must plunder the temple in Delphi, and after the plunder, all must perish. Therefore, knowing this, we will neither go to this temple nor attempt to plunder it, and for this reason, we will not be destroyed. So, as many of you as are well-disposed towards the Persians, rejoice for this reason, as we will prevail over the Greeks.' Having said this to them, he indicated for the second time that they should prepare everything and make it ready, as there would be a battle at the same time on the following day.
43. This prophecy indeed, which Mardonius said was about the Persians, I know was made concerning the Illyrians and the army of the Enchelees, but not about the Persians. However, the things made by Bacis concerning this battle are as follows: "By the stream of Thermodon and the grassy banks of Asopus, a gathering of Greeks and the barbarian's war cry will meet, where many will fall by the lot and fate of the bow-bearing Medes, when the destined day comes." I know that these things and others similar to them, which are held by Musaeus, are about the Persians. And the Thermodon river flows between Tanagra and Glisas.
44. After the inquiry of the oracles and the encouragement from Mardonius, night came, and they arranged for guards. And when the night had advanced and there seemed to be quiet throughout the camps and the people were mostly in sleep, at that time, Alexander, the son of Amyntas, being both a general and king of the Macedonians, approached on horseback to the guards of the Athenians, seeking to come into conversation with the generals. Of the guards, most remained, but some went to the generals, and having arrived, they said that a man had come on horseback from the camp of the Medes, who did not reveal any other word, but naming the generals, he said he wished to come into conversation.
45. When they heard these things, they immediately went to the guards. And when they arrived, Alexander spoke these words: "Men of Athens, I entrust these words to you as a secret, asking you to tell no one except Pausanias, lest you destroy me; for I would not speak if I were not greatly concerned for all of Greece. For I myself am of ancient Greek lineage, and I would not wish to see Greece enslaved instead of free. Therefore, I say that Mardonius and his army have not been able to receive favorable omens from the sacrifices; for you would have fought long ago. Now, however, he has decided to let the sacrifices be and to engage in battle at the break of day; for he fears, I suppose, that more of you may gather. Prepare yourselves for this. And if Mardonius should delay the engagement and not make it, be patient and remain steadfast; for they have only a few days' provisions left. And if this war should end according to your desire, it is fitting for someone to remember me also concerning my freedom, who have done such a risky deed for the sake of the Greeks out of eagerness, wishing to show you Mardonius' intent, so that the barbarians may not fall upon you unexpectedly and unawares. I am Alexander the Macedonian." Having said these things, he drove back to the camp and his own position.
46. The Athenian generals went to the right wing and told Pausanias what they had heard from Alexander. Pausanias, worried about the Persians, said the following: "Since the battle will take place at dawn, it is necessary for you Athenians to stand against the Persians, while we stand against the Boeotians and the Greeks who are arrayed against you, for these reasons: you are familiar with the Persians and their way of fighting from the battle at Marathon, while we are inexperienced and ignorant of these men. For no Spartan has ever fought against the Persians; but we are experienced with the Boeotians and Thessalians. Therefore, taking up our arms, it is necessary for you to go to this wing, and for us to go to the left." In response to this, the Athenians said the following: "For us too, from the very beginning, when we saw the Persians arrayed against you, it came to our minds to say the same things that you, having anticipated us, now propose. But we were afraid that our words might not be pleasing to you. Since, then, you yourselves have remembered, our words have become pleasing to us, and we are ready to do these things."
47. As this pleased both parties, at the first light of dawn they exchanged their positions. The Boeotians, having noticed what was being done, reported it to Mardonius. When he heard it, he immediately attempted to change his position as well, leading the Persians against the Lacedaemonians. When Pausanias learned that such a thing was happening, knowing that he was not hidden, he led the Spartans back to the right wing. And in the same way, Mardonius led his army to the left wing.
48. When they had returned to their original positions, Mardonius sent a herald to the Spartans, saying these words: "O Lacedaemonians, you are said to be the bravest men among these people, marveling that you neither flee from war nor abandon your ranks, remaining either to destroy your enemies or to be destroyed yourselves. But of these things, none was true: for before we could engage and come to the law of hands, we saw you fleeing and leaving your position, placing yourselves with the Athenians in the front and arranging yourselves opposite our slaves. These are not the deeds of good men, but we have been most deceived in you. For expecting, according to your fame, that you would send a herald to challenge us and wishing to fight alone with the Persians, we found you doing nothing of the sort, but rather trembling. Now then, since you did not begin this speech, we begin it. Why indeed do you not, on behalf of the Greeks, since you are considered the best, and we on behalf of the barbarians, fight equal against equal in number? And if it seems right to fight also with the others, let them fight afterward; but if it does not seem right and it is necessary for us alone to fight, let us do so: and whichever of us shall be victorious, let them be victorious for the whole army."
49. The herald, having said these things and waiting for a time, when no one answered him anything, he withdrew back, and going away, he reported to Mardonius the things that had happened. He, becoming very joyful and elated by this cold victory, sent the cavalry against the Greeks. And when the horsemen charged, they attacked the entire Greek army, throwing javelins and shooting arrows, being both mounted archers and difficult to approach. They also disturbed and blocked the Gargaphian spring, from which the entire Greek army was supplied with water. Now, the Lacedaemonians alone were stationed near the spring, and for the other Greeks, the spring was farther away, depending on where they were positioned, and the Asopus river was nearby. But being prevented from the Asopus, they went to the spring for water in this way: for it was not possible for them to carry water from the river because of the horsemen and the arrows.
50. As this was happening, the generals of the Greeks, seeing that their army was deprived of water and being disturbed by the horsemen, gathered together to discuss these matters and others, going to Pausanias at the right wing. For there were other issues troubling them more than these: they no longer had provisions, and those who had been sent by them to the Peloponnese to bring supplies were hindered by the horsemen, unable to reach the camp.
51. While the generals were deliberating, they decided that if the Persians did not engage in battle on that day, they would go to the Island. This place is ten stadia away from the Asopus river and the Gargaphian spring, near the city of Plataea. It would be an island in the mainland: the river, splitting from above, flows down from Cithaeron into the plain, separating the streams from each other by about three stadia, and then it merges into one. Its name is Oeroe, and the locals say that it is the daughter of Asopus. They planned to move to this place so that they could have access to abundant water and the horsemen would not harass them as they were now. They thought it best to move during the second watch of the night so that the Persians would not see them setting out and the horsemen, following them, would not disturb them. When they arrived at this place, which the Asopian Oeroe surrounds, flowing from Cithaeron, they planned to send half of the army to Cithaeron during that night to bring back the followers who had gone for provisions and were now stranded on Cithaeron.
52. Having deliberated on these matters, they endured an unrelenting struggle throughout the entire day, with the cavalry pressing upon them. But as the day came to an end and the horsemen ceased their attacks, during the night, at the appointed hour for their withdrawal, the majority of them began to depart. They did not have in mind to go to the place that had been agreed upon, but instead, as they set out, they gladly fled from the cavalry towards the city of Plataea. As they fled, they arrived at the sanctuary of Hera, which is situated in front of the city of Plataea, twenty stadia away from the Gargaphian spring. Upon arriving, they placed their weapons in front of the temple.
53. And they indeed set up camp around the temple of Hera, but Pausanias, seeing them departing from the camp, ordered the Lacedaemonians to pick up their weapons and follow the others who were advancing, thinking they were going to the place they had agreed upon. At this point, the other captains were ready to obey Pausanias, but Amompharetus, son of Poliades, leader of the Pitanate battalion, said he would not flee from the foreigners nor willingly bring shame to Sparta, and he was astonished seeing what was being done, as he had not been present at the previous discussion. Pausanias and Euryanax were greatly troubled by his refusal to obey them, but even more so, with him refusing these things, they were afraid to leave behind the Pitanate battalion, lest they, following the agreement with the other Greeks, leave Amompharetus and those with him to be destroyed. Considering these things, they held the Laconian camp without trembling, and they attempted to persuade him, saying that it was not necessary to do these things.
54. And they indeed tried to persuade Amompharetus, who was the only one left behind from the Lacedaemonians and Tegeans, while the Athenians did the following: they held themselves without trembling in the place where they were arranged, knowing the intentions of the Lacedaemonians that they think one thing and say another. And when the camp was set in motion, they sent a horseman of their own to see whether the Spartans would attempt to march or not at all intend to withdraw, and to inquire of Pausanias what it was necessary for the Athenians to do.
55. When the herald arrived at the Lacedaemonians, indeed he saw them arranged in their positions and their leaders engaged in a heated argument. For as Euryanax and Pausanias tried to persuade Amompharetus not to risk staying alone as Lacedaemonians, they did not convince him, and they fell into a heated argument when the Athenian herald arrived. And Amompharetus, arguing, took a stone with both hands and placed it before the feet of Pausanias, saying that with this stone he voted not to flee from the strangers, referring to the barbarians. But Pausanias called him a madman and not of sound mind, and when the Athenian herald asked the question he was sent with, Pausanias ordered him to tell the Athenians about the present matters, and he requested that the Athenians join them and do whatever they themselves would do concerning the departure.
56. And the messenger went back to the Athenians; and as dawn caught them arguing among themselves, during this time Pausanias, not thinking that Amompharetus would be left behind when the other Lacedaemonians departed, indeed what happened, he ordered the rest of them all to march through the hills; and the Tegeans followed. The Athenians, however, having been arranged, went the opposite way than the Lacedaemonians: for while they held against the hills and feared the horsemen of the lower slopes of Cithaeron, the Athenians, having been turned down, went into the plain.
57. At first, Amompharetus indeed not thinking that Pausanias would dare to leave them behind, insisted on not leaving their position. But as those with Pausanias advanced, realizing that they were leaving him behind with a straight plan, he ordered his battalion to pick up their weapons and led them on foot towards the other troops. And the rest, having gone about ten furlongs, waited for Amompharetus' battalion, stationed near the Molois river and a place called Argiopium, where the temple of Eleusinian Demeter is situated. They waited for this reason: so that if Amompharetus and his battalion did not leave their position but stayed there, they could provide assistance from behind. And as those around Amompharetus arrived, the entire cavalry of the barbarians pressed upon them. For the horsemen did what they were accustomed to do always, and seeing that the place where the Greeks had been stationed on the previous days was empty, they drove their horses ever forward and attacked them as soon as they caught up with them.
58. When Mardonius learned that the Greeks had departed during the night and saw the empty space, he called Thorax of Larissa and his brothers Eurypylus and Thrasydeius and said, "O sons of Aleuas, what will you say now, seeing this emptiness? For you, the neighbors, used to say that the Lacedaemonians do not flee from battle, but are the foremost men in warlike matters: you saw them before changing their position from the order, and now we all see them having fled during the passing night. And they have shown, since it was necessary for them to be decided in battle against the truly best of men, that they are in no way being among any Greeks. And for you, being inexperienced in Persians, much forgiveness came from me, praising these men whom you also knew somewhat: but I was more amazed at Artabazus, that he also should have been afraid of the Lacedaemonians and having been afraid should accept the most cowardly opinion, that it was necessary to break up the camp and go to the city of the Thebans to be besieged: the king will hear of this from me still. And of these things there will be another account. Now, however, it is not to be allowed that these men do this, but they must be pursued until they are caught and will give us the penalty for all the things they have done to the Persians."
59. Having said this, Mardonius led the Persians across the Asopus River at a run, following the tracks of the Greeks as if they were indeed fleeing. He pressed upon the Lacedaemonians and Tegeans alone, for he did not see the Athenians who had turned towards the plain beneath the hills. Seeing the Persians rushing to pursue the Greeks, the other commanders of the barbarian forces immediately raised their standards, and they chased as each had the ability of their feet, neither arranged in any order nor in any formation.
60. And these men indeed rushed with a shout and a throng, thinking they would completely defeat the Greeks. Pausanias, however, as the cavalry was attacking, sent a horseman to the Athenians, saying these things: "Men of Athens, with a great contest lying before us, whether Greece will be free or enslaved, we have been betrayed by our allies, both we Lacedaemonians and you Athenians, as they fled during the passing night. Now, therefore, it has been decided what must be done by us here: for defending ourselves as best as we can, we must support one another. If indeed the cavalry had attacked you first, it would have been necessary for us and the Tegeans, who are with us, not to betray Greece, to help you. But now, for the entire attack has come upon us, you are just in going to defend the division that is under the most pressure. And if indeed it has become impossible for you to help, send us your archers, and set favor upon us. We know that you are much more eager than anyone else in this present war, so as to even listen to these things."
61. When the Athenians learned of this, they set out to help and defend the Lacedaemonians as best as they could. However, as they began to advance, the Greeks who had sided with the king attacked them, so that they could no longer provide assistance, for they were occupied with their immediate adversaries. Thus, the Lacedaemonians and Tegeans were left to face the battle alone, with their soldiers and light-armed troops, numbering 50,000 Lacedaemonians and 3,000 Tegeans (for these never separated from the Lacedaemonians). They performed sacrifices, preparing to engage Mardonius and the army present. But their sacrifices did not yield favorable results, and many of them fell and were wounded during this time: for the Persians, having set up their shields, shot many arrows without restraint, so that the Spartans were pressed and their sacrifices did not come to pass. Pausanias, looking towards the temple of Hera in Plataea, called upon the goddess, desperately asking that they not be deceived of their hopes.
62. While this one was still invoking, the Tegeans first rose up and advanced against the barbarians, and immediately after the prayer of Pausanias, favorable sacrifices were made for the Lacedaemonians. And when at some time it happened, they too advanced upon the Persians, and the Persians met them, exchanging their bows. The battle first took place around the shield barrier. And when this had fallen, the battle was already fierce near the temple of Demeter and for a long time, until they came to close combat: for the barbarians, seizing the spears, broke them. Now indeed, in courage and strength, the Persians were not inferior, but being unarmed and unskilled, they were not equal to their opponents in wisdom, and charging one by one and ten, and more and fewer together, they fell upon the Spartans and were destroyed.
63. Now Mardonius happened to be on a white horse, fighting from it and having around himself a thousand of the best Persian warriors, and they pressed hard upon their opponents in this place. As long as Mardonius was alive, they indeed held out and defending themselves, they brought down many of the Lacedaemonians. But when Mardonius died and the strongest part of the army that was around him fell, thus indeed the others turned and yielded to the Lacedaemonians. For their clothing being devoid of armor showed them to be at the greatest disadvantage: for being naked, they made a contest against men who were armed.
64. In this place, both the justice for Leonidas according to the oracle was fulfilled for the Spartans by Mardonius, and Pausanias, the son of Cleombrotus and grandson of Anaxandrides, obtained the most beautiful victory of all those we know. The names of the ancestors above him have been mentioned up to Leonidas; for they happen to be the same for them. And Mardonius dies by Aeimnestus, a man esteemed in Sparta, who later, after the Median affairs, having three hundred men, fought at Stenyclerus in a war against all the Messenians, and he himself died and the three hundred.
65. At Plataea, when the Persians were turned back by the Lacedaemonians, they fled without order to their own camp and to the wooden wall they had constructed in the Theban territory. It is a marvel to me how, while fighting near Demeter's grove, not a single Persian appeared to have entered the sacred precinct or died within it; most of them fell around the temple on the profane ground. I think, if one must consider divine matters, the goddess herself did not accept them, as they had set fire to her temple, the sanctuary at Eleusis.
66. Now this battle proceeded thus far. Artabazus, son of Pharnaces, was immediately displeased from the beginning when Mardonius was left behind by the king, and at that time, advising much against it, he achieved nothing, not allowing them to engage. And he himself did such things as not being pleased with the matters done by Mardonius. Artabazus was a general (and he had a force not small, but even about four myriads of men around himself), these men, as the engagement was happening, knowing well what was going to result from the battle, he led them in an orderly manner, ordering them all to go in the same direction as he himself would lead, so that they might see him having eagerness. Having given these orders, as if leading them into battle, he then led the army. But when he saw the Persians fleeing earlier on the road, he no longer led them in the same order, but he hurried, fleeing as fast as possible, neither to the wooden wall nor to the Theban wall, but to Phocis, wanting to arrive at the Hellespont as quickly as possible.
67. And indeed, these men turned in that direction: of the other Greeks who were with the king and fought poorly on purpose, the Boeotians fought against the Athenians for a long time. For the Thebans who sided with the Medes, they had no small eagerness in fighting and not wanting to fight cowardly, so that three hundred of their first and best men fell there by the Athenians. But when these men also turned, they fled to Thebes, not in the same way as the Persians and the whole group of the other allies, neither having fought anyone nor having achieved anything, they fled.
68. It is clear to me that the entire affair of the barbarians depended on the Persians, since even then they fled before even engaging with the enemy, because they saw the Persians fleeing. Thus, everyone fled except for the cavalry, both the Boeotian and the others. This cavalry aided the fleeing soldiers so much, always being closest to the enemy and protecting their fleeing friends from the Greeks.
69. The Greeks, indeed, being victorious, pursued Xerxes' men, both chasing and killing them. In the meantime, during this occurring fear, a message was sent to the other Greeks who were stationed around the temple of Hera and had withdrawn from the battle, that a battle had taken place and those with Pausanias were victorious. Hearing this, they, having been arranged with no order, some around the Corinthians turned through the mountainous path and the columns leading straight up to the temple of Demeter, while others around the Megarians and Phliasians took the smoothest of the roads through the plain. Then, when the Megarians and Phliasians were near the enemy, the Theban horsemen, seeing them, driven with no order and being urged on, charged their horses against them, with Asopodorus, son of Timander, being their commander. Falling upon them, they trampled six hundred of them, and chasing the rest, they drove them towards Cithaeron.
70. These people indeed perished without any account: the Persians and the other multitude, as they fled to the wooden wall, quickly climbed the towers before the Lacedaemonians arrived, and having climbed, they fortified the wall as best as they could. When the Lacedaemonians approached, a stronger wall-fight stood against them. For while the Athenians were absent, they defended themselves and had much more advantage over the Lacedaemonians, who did not know how to fight against walls. But when the Athenians came to them, then indeed a strong wall-fight took place and lasted for a long time. Finally, the Athenians, by virtue and persistence, climbed the wall and broke it down: through this, the Greeks entered. The Tegeans were the first to enter the wall, and they were the ones who plundered Mardonius' tent, both the other things from it and the horse feeding trough, which was entirely made of bronze and worthy of sight. Now, the Tegeans dedicated this feeding trough of Mardonius to the temple of Athena Alea; the other things, as much as they took, they brought to the Greeks. The barbarians, however, made no more resistance when the wall fell, nor did any of them remember their courage, but they were in a panic, as many myriads of people were crowded in a small space and terrified. It was present for the Greeks to kill so many that out of the thirty myriads of the army, with Artabazus fleeing and holding four myriads, not even three thousand of the remaining ones survived. Of the Lacedaemonians from Sparta, all who died in the battle were ninety-one, of the Tegeans, sixteen, and of the Athenians, fifty-two.
71. Among the barbarians, the Persian infantry indeed excelled, and the cavalry of the Sacae, and Mardonius is said to have been the bravest man: and of the Greeks, while the Tegeans and Athenians were valiant, the Lacedaemonians surpassed them in courage. I have no one else to point out (for all these conquered those opposed to them), but because they were brought against the strongest and conquered them. And by far the best was Aristodemus, according to our judgments, who, having been saved alone from the three hundred at Thermopylae, had disgrace and dishonor. After him, Posidonius and Philocyon and Amompharetus the Spartan excelled. And yet, when there was a discussion about who would become the best of them, the Spartans who were present recognized that Aristodemus indeed clearly wanted to die because of the present charge against him, and raving and leaving the ranks to undertake great deeds, but Posidonius did not want to die and became a brave man: so much better was he. But these things might be said even out of envy: all those whom I have mentioned, except for Aristodemus, of those who died in this battle, became honored: Aristodemus, however, wanting to die because of the aforementioned charge, was not honored.
72. These men became the most famous of those in Plataea. For Callicrates died outside of the battle, having come as the most beautiful man to the camp of the Greeks at that time, not only of the Lacedaemonians but also of the other Greeks: who, since Pausanias was sacrificing, sitting in the line, was wounded in the side by an arrow. And indeed, while some were fighting, he, having been carried out, was dying slowly and said to Arimnestus, a man of Plataea, that he did not care that he was dying for Greece, but that he had not used his hand and that there was no work done by him worthy of his own eagerness to undertake.
73. Sophanes, the son of Eutychides, from the deme of Decelea, is said to have gained distinction among the Athenians. Decelea, indeed, once performed a useful deed for all time, as the Athenians themselves say. For when, in the past, the sons of Tyndarus invaded the land of Attica with a great multitude of an army to recover Helen, and searched the towns, not knowing where Helen was hidden, they say that the Deceleans, and some say Decelus himself, angered by the arrogance of Theseus and fearing for the whole land of the Athenians, revealed the whole matter to them and guided them to Aphidnae, which Titacus, being a native, betrayed to the sons of Tyndarus. And for the Deceleans, from this deed, exemption and precedence at feasts continue in Sparta to this day, so that even in the later war, which happened many years after these events, between the Athenians and the Peloponnesians, when the Lacedaemonians ravaged the rest of Attica, they refrained from Decelea.
74. Sophanes, being from that deme, and having excelled then among the Athenians, has two stories told about him: one, that he wore an iron anchor tied to his cuirass' belt with a bronze chain, which he would throw when he approached the enemies, so that the enemies, falling out of their ranks, would not be able to move him; and when the opponents fled, it was thought that he would take up the anchor and thus pursue. This story is told in such a way, but the other story, disputing the one previously told, says that he wore an anchor on a shield that was always spinning around and never trembling, and not an iron anchor tied to the cuirass.
75. There is also another splendid deed performed by Sophanes, that when the Athenians were besieging Aegina, he killed Eurybates, the Argive man, a pentathlete, in response to a challenge. But Sophanes himself, later in time after these events, having become a good man, serving as a general of the Athenians together with Leagrus, the son of Glaucon, died at the hands of the Edonians in Datus, fighting over the gold mines.
76. As the barbarians were laid low by the Greeks at Plataea, a woman came over to them as a deserter. When she learned that the Persians had been destroyed and the Greeks were victorious, being a concubine of Pharandates, a Persian man and son of Teaspis, she adorned herself and her attendants with much gold and the finest clothes of those present. Descending from her carriage, she went to the Lacedaemonians who were still in the midst of the slaughter. Seeing Pausanias there directing everything, and knowing his name and homeland from having heard it many times before, she recognized Pausanias and, taking hold of his knees, she said the following: "O king of Sparta, save me, your suppliant, from the slavery of captivity. For you have already helped me by destroying these men who have no regard for the gods or any divine beings. I am of Coan descent, the daughter of Hegetorides, son of Antagoras. The Persian took me by force in Cos and held me captive." He replied with these words: "Woman, take courage, and as a suppliant, and if indeed you happen to be speaking the truth and are the daughter of Hegetorides of Cos, who happens to be my closest friend among those dwelling in those regions." Having said this, he then entrusted her to the ephors who were present, and later sent her to Aegina, where she herself wished to go.
77. After the arrival of the woman, immediately after that, the Mantineans arrived when everything was already done. Learning that they had come too late for the battle, they made a great misfortune, and they said it was fitting for them to be punished. Inquiring about the Medes who were fleeing with Artabazus, they pursued them as far as Thessaly; but the Lacedaemonians did not allow them to chase the fleeing men. So, having returned to their own land, they banished the leaders of the army from the land. After the Mantineans, the Eleans arrived, and in the same way, the Eleans, having made a misfortune like the Mantineans, departed; and having departed, they too banished their leaders. So much for the matters concerning the Mantineans and Eleans.
78. In the camp of the Aeginetans at Plataea, there was Lampon, son of Pytheas, who was foremost among the Aeginetans. He, having a most impious proposal, went to Pausanias, and coming with haste, he said these things: "O son of Cleombrotus, a deed of great size and beauty has been done by you, and the god has given you, having saved Hellas, to lay down the greatest fame of the Greeks whom we know. But do also the remaining things after these, so that an even greater story may hold you, and someone later may guard against the barbarians not existing, doing reckless deeds against the Greeks. For when Leonidas died at Thermopylae, Mardonius and Xerxes, having cut off his head, crucified it. To him, you giving the same in return, will have praise first from all Spartans, and then also from the other Greeks: for having impaled Mardonius, you will have avenged your uncle Leonidas."
79. Lampon said this, thinking to please, but he answered with these words: "O stranger from Aegina, I appreciate your goodwill and foresight, but you have missed the mark of good judgment. For you have raised me high, praising my homeland and my deeds, but then you have brought me down to nothing, advising me to dishonor the dead, and if I do this, you say I will be heard of more. Such things are more fitting for barbarians to do than Greeks, and even they are criticized for it. Therefore, I would not wish to please either the Aeginetans or those who approve of such things, but rather, it is necessary for me to please the Spartans by doing what is right and speaking what is right. As for Leonidas, whom you urge me to avenge, I say he has been greatly avenged, for with the countless souls of these men he has been honored, both he and the others who died at Thermopylae. But you, still holding such a speech, neither come to me nor advise me, and know that you are unhurt by grace."
80. Upon hearing this, Lampon departed. Pausanias, having made a proclamation that no one should touch the spoils, ordered the helots to gather the wealth. As they scattered throughout the camp, they found tents adorned with gold and silver, couches overlaid with gold and silver, golden bowls and cups, and other drinking vessels. They also discovered sacks on wagons, in which gold and silver cauldrons were visible. From the lying dead, they plundered armlets, twisted necklaces, and golden daggers, since there was no mention of the embroidered clothing. At this point, the helots stole and sold many things to the Aeginetans, but they also displayed much that they could not hide. As a result, the Aeginetans began to amass their great wealth from then on, as they bought gold from the helots as if it were mere bronze.
81. Having gathered the wealth and taken out a tenth for the god at Delphi, from which the golden tripod was dedicated, the one with the bronze three-headed serpent standing closest to the altar; and having taken out a tenth for the god at Olympia, from which a ten-cubit high bronze Zeus was dedicated; and having taken out a tenth for the god at the Isthmus, from which a seven-cubit high bronze Poseidon was made; having taken out these, they divided the remaining wealth, and each received, according to their worth, the Persian concubines, gold, silver, and other wealth, as well as beasts of burden. Now, how much was given to those who had distinguished themselves at Plataea is not mentioned by anyone, but I think that they too were given gifts. Pausanias, however, received ten times more of everything, women, horses, talents, camels, and other wealth.
82. It is said that this also happened: when Xerxes fled from Hellas, he left his own luxurious belongings to Mardonius. So, Pausanias, seeing Mardonius' possessions adorned with gold and silver and colorful tapestries, ordered the bakers and cooks to prepare a dinner in the same way as they did for Mardonius. When they did this, Pausanias, seeing the gold and silver couches well spread and the gold and silver tables and the magnificent preparation of the dinner, was amazed at the good things set before him and ordered, with laughter, his own servants to prepare a Laconian dinner. When the feast was prepared, there was a great difference, and Pausanias, laughing, sent for the generals of the Greeks. When they came together, Pausanias said, pointing to each of the dinner preparations, "Men of Hellas, I gathered you here because I wanted to show you the foolishness of this leader of the Medes, who, having such a lifestyle as this, came to us who have such a miserable one, to take it away." These things are said to have been spoken by Pausanias to the generals of the Greeks.
83. However, at a later time after these events, many of the Plataeans found chests of gold and silver and other possessions. And this also appeared later, when the flesh had been stripped from the dead bodies: for the Plataeans gathered the bones into one place: a head was found having no seam but being of one bone, and there appeared also a jaw with the upper part of the jaw having teeth of one continuous bone, both the front teeth and the molars, and the bones of a man five cubits tall were found.
84. On the second day after Mardonius' death, his body disappeared, and I cannot say for certain by whom it was taken. Indeed, I have already heard various people from many places claim to have buried Mardonius, and I know that many received great gifts from Artontes, the son of Mardonius, for this deed. However, whoever among them actually took and buried the body of Mardonius, I cannot ascertain with certainty. There is also a rumor that Dionysophanes, a man from Ephesus, buried Mardonius. But in such a manner, he was buried.
85. The Greeks, when they divided the spoils at Plataea, buried their own dead separately, each group. The Lacedaemonians indeed made three tombs: there they buried the irens, of whom were also Poseidonius, Amompharetus, Philocyon, and Callicrates. In one of the tombs were the irens, in the other the other Spartiates, and in the third the helots. These indeed buried in such a way, but the Tegeans separately all together, and the Athenians their own together, and the Megarians and Phliasians those destroyed by the horse. Of these indeed all the tombs became full: but of the others as many as also appear in Plataea being tombs, these, as I learn, being ashamed of the absence from the battle, each built mounds for the sake of the people coming after, since also there is a tomb of the Aeginetans there called, which I hear also ten years later after these things, the Aeginetans having requested, Cleades the son of Autodicus, a man of Plataea, being their guest-friend, built.
86. As indeed the Greeks buried their dead at Plataea, immediately they deliberated and it seemed good to them to march upon Thebes and demand from them those who had sided with the Persians, and among them Timagenidas and Attaginus, who were leaders among the foremost: and if they did not give them up, not to depart from the city before they took it. As this seemed good to them, thus indeed on the eleventh day from the battle, arriving, they besieged the Thebans, demanding to give up the men: but as the Thebans were not willing to give them up, they cut their land and attacked the wall.
87. And indeed, they did not cease their attacks, and on the twentieth day, Timagenidas spoke these words to the Thebans: "Men of Thebes, since it has been decided by the Greeks that they will not withdraw from the siege until they either take Thebes or you hand us over to them, now then, in order not to let the land of Boeotia suffer more on our account, if they demand us as a pretext for needing money, let us give them money from the common treasury (for we sided with the Persians not only by ourselves but also with the common consent), but if they truly need us and besiege the city, we ourselves will offer ourselves for trial." And it seemed that he spoke very well and at the right time, and immediately the Thebans sent a herald to Pausanias, wanting to hand over the men.
88. When they agreed upon these terms, Attaginus indeed escaped from the city, but his sons, having been taken away, Pausanias released from the charge, saying that they were not at all responsible for the betrayal. The other men whom the Thebans handed over, they thought they would prevail in their defense and indeed trusted that they would be driven away with money. But when he received them, suspecting these very things, he sent away the entire army of the allies and, having led those men to Corinth, he destroyed them. These things happened in Plataea and Thebes.
89. Artabazus, son of Pharnaces, fleeing from Plataea, indeed was far away. And when he arrived, the Thessalians welcomed him and invited him for hospitality, and they asked about the rest of the army, knowing nothing of what had happened at Plataea. Artabazus, realizing that if he wished to tell them the whole truth of the battles, he himself would be in danger of being destroyed, and so would the army with him; for he thought that everyone would attack him upon learning what had happened. Considering these things, he neither told anything to the Phocians nor said the following to the Thessalians: "I, men of Thessaly, as you see, am hurrying as quickly as possible to Thrace, and I am eager, having been sent for some business from the camp with these men. Mardonius himself and his army, following close behind me, are expected. Welcome him and show yourselves to be well-doing; for you will not regret doing these things in time." And having said this, he drove his army with haste through Thessaly and Macedonia, straight to Thrace, as if truly hurrying, and cutting through the middle of the road. And he arrived at Byzantium, having left behind many of his own army cut down by Thracians along the way and having succumbed to hunger and exhaustion. And from Byzantium, he crossed over in ships. Thus, he returned to Asia in this way.
90. On the very same day that the disaster occurred at Plataea, it so happened that there was also a battle at Mycale in Ionia. For when the Greeks who were in the ships, together with Leutychides the Lacedaemonian, arrived and were stationed at Delos, messengers came to them from Samos, Lampon son of Thrasycles, Athenagoras son of Archestratides, and Hegesistratus son of Aristagoras, sent secretly by the Samians without the knowledge of the Persians and of the tyrant Theomestor son of Androdamas, whom the Persians had appointed as ruler of Samos. When these men came to the generals, Hegesistratus spoke at length and on various subjects, saying that if the Ionians only saw them, they would revolt from the Persians, and that the barbarians would not stand their ground; and if they did stand their ground, the Greeks would not find any other such opportunity to gain a victory. He also invoked their common gods and urged them to deliver the Greek men from slavery and to drive away the barbarian. He said that this would be easy for them to accomplish, for their ships were in bad condition and not a match for the Greeks. And if they suspected that they were leading them on with deceit, they were ready to be taken as hostages on their ships.
91. As the Samian guest was fervently pleading, Leutychides asked, whether wanting to learn a sign or by chance due to divine intervention, "Oh Samian stranger, what is your name?" And he said, "Hegesistratus." Then, interrupting the remaining speech, if Hegesistratus was about to say anything, he said, "I accept the omen of Hegesistratus, oh Samian stranger. And you, do for us so that, giving assurance yourself, you will sail away and these who are with you, indeed the Samians will be eager allies for us."
92. These things he spoke and at the same time led to action. For the Samians immediately made pledges and oaths concerning alliance with the Greeks. Having done these things, some sailed away; for with them, he ordered Hegesistratus to sail, making his name an omen. Leutychides spoke and immediately took action. The Samians quickly pledged and swore an oath to be allies with the Greeks. After this, the others left, but Leutychides asked Hegesistratus to sail with the Greeks because his name was a good omen.
93. The Greeks, holding back on that day, were preparing for battle the next day, with Deiphonus, son of Evenius, a man from Apollonia, which is in the Ionian Gulf, acting as their diviner. This Evenius' father had experienced the following event. In this Apollonia, there are sacred sheep of the Sun, which graze by day beside the Chon River, which flows from Mount Lacmon through the land of Apollonia and into the sea near the harbor of Oricum; and at night, they are guarded by men who are the wealthiest and most distinguished of the citizens, each for a year. For the Apolloniates greatly value these sheep because of a certain oracle. They are kept in a cave away from the city. At that time, this Evenius was the chosen guardian. Once, when he had fallen asleep, wolves passed by his watch and entered the cave, destroying about sixty of the sheep. He, however, kept silent and told no one, intending to replace them by buying others. But this did not escape the notice of the Apolloniates; when they found out, they brought him to court and condemned him, as he had fallen asleep during his watch, to be deprived of his sight. After they had blinded Evenius, immediately thereafter, neither did their sheep give birth any longer nor did their land bear fruit as before. It became clear to them both at Dodona and at Delphi, when they asked the prophets the cause of their present misfortune, who told them that they had unjustly deprived the guardian of the sacred sheep, Evenius, of his sight; for they themselves had sent the wolves, and they would not stop taking vengeance on him until they gave him the justice of what he himself would choose and approve. When these things were accomplished, they themselves would give Evenius such a gift that many men would consider him fortunate for having it.
94. These oracles were thus given to them, and the Apolloniates, having made them secret, set forth men of the citizens to carry out the matter. And they carried it out for them in this way: sitting down with Evenius in a seat, those who were present came and made other speeches, until they came down to commiserating with him for his suffering; and leading on from this, they asked what compensation he would choose, if the Apolloniates were willing to undergo judgment to give satisfaction for what they had done. He, not having heard the divine prophecy, chose, saying that if someone would give him fields, naming those of the citizens which he knew to be the most beautiful, two lots in Apollonia, and a dwelling in addition to these, which he knew to be the most beautiful of those in the city, he said that having obtained these, he would be without anger for the rest, and this compensation would be sufficient for him. And while he was saying these things, those who were present, having taken it up, said, "Evenius, the Apolloniates pay you this compensation for the blinding, according to the divine prophecies that have come to pass." He indeed did terrible things in response to these, then learning the whole story, as he had been deceived; but they, having bought from those who possessed them, gave him what he had chosen. And after this, he immediately had an innate power of divination, so that he even became famous.
95. Indeed, Deiphonus, the son of Evenius, being hired by the Corinthians, divined for the army. But I have also heard this, that Deiphonus, making use of the name of Evenius, received work throughout Greece, not being the son of Evenius.
96. To the Greeks, as they received favorable signs, they set sail with their ships from Delos towards Samos. And when they arrived at Calamisa of Samos, some of them, having anchored there, prepared for a sea battle near the temple of Hera, while the Persians, learning that they were sailing towards them, set sail themselves towards the mainland with their other ships, and sent the Phoenician ships to sail away. For in their deliberations, it seemed best to them not to engage in a sea battle, for they did not think they were equal. And they sailed to the mainland so that they might be under their infantry army that was in Mycale, which, by the command of Xerxes, was left behind from the rest of the army to guard Ionia. The number of this army was six myriads, and Tigranes, who surpassed the Persians in beauty and size, was their general. Under this army, the admirals of the naval force, having taken refuge, planned to haul up their ships and surround them with a fence, as a defense for both the ships and themselves.
97. Having made this plan, they set sail. And arriving near the temple of the Potniae at Mycale, at Gaeson and Scolopoeis, where there is a temple of Demeter Eleusinia, which Philistus, son of Pasicles, established, following Nileus, son of Codrus, for the founding of Miletus, there they hauled up their ships and surrounded them with a fence of stones and wood, having cut down trees during the day, and they fixed stakes around the fence, and they prepared as if they would be besieged and as if they would be victorious, for considering both possibilities, they prepared.
98. When the Greeks learned that the barbarians had withdrawn to the mainland, they were disappointed that their enemy had escaped and were uncertain whether to return home or sail towards the Hellespont. In the end, they decided not to do either of these things, but to sail to the mainland instead. So, having prepared for a naval battle with gangways and all other necessary equipment, they sailed towards Mycale. When they came close to the camp and saw no one coming out to meet them, but rather ships drawn up within the wall and a large infantry force stationed along the shore, Leutychides, sailing close to the shore in his ship, had a herald address the Ionians, saying, "Men of Ionia, those of you who happen to hear me, learn what I say: for the Persians will certainly not understand any of the things I am commanding you. When we engage in battle, it is necessary for someone to remember freedom first of all, and then the password 'Hebe.' And let this be known to those who have not heard it from those who have." This very plan happened to be the same as that of Themistocles at Artemisium: either the words would escape the notice of the barbarians and he would persuade the Ionians, or, if they were reported to the barbarians, he would make them distrustful of the Greeks.
99. Following Leutychides' advice, the Greeks indeed did these things: bringing their ships close, they disembarked onto the shore. And while they were arranging themselves, the Persians, seeing the Greeks preparing for battle and having encouraged the Ionians, suspected that the Samians were siding with the Greeks and took away their weapons. For the Samians, upon the arrival of Athenian prisoners in the ships of the barbarians, those who had been left behind in Attica by Xerxes, had freed all of them and sent them away, providing supplies for their journey to Athens. For this reason, they were not least suspicious, having freed five hundred heads of Xerxes' enemies. And they ordered the Milesians to guard the paths leading to the peaks of Mycale, as they supposedly knew the land best. They did this for the following reason: so that they would be outside the camp. The Persians guarded against these Ionians, whom they also suspected might do something new if they got hold of power, with such measures. And they themselves brought their shields together to be a wall for them.
100. As the Greeks, indeed, prepared themselves, they approached the barbarians. And as they went, a rumor entered into the whole camp, and a herald's wand appeared lying on the wave-beaten shore. The rumor passed through them in this way, that the Greeks were defeating Mardonius' army, fighting in Boeotia. It is clear, indeed, by many signs that divine intervention is involved in these events, if even then, on the same day coinciding with the wound that was about to happen both at Plataea and at Mycale, a rumor reached the Greeks here, so that the army was much more encouraged and more willing to face danger.
101. And this other thing happened as well, that the precincts of Eleusinian Demeter were near both the battlefields: for indeed, the battle in Plataea took place near the Demeter's temple, as has been mentioned to me before, and it was going to be the same in Mycale. The rumor of the victory of the Greeks with Pausanias came to them accurately: for the event in Plataea happened still in the morning of the day, and the one in Mycale around the afternoon: and that they happened on the same day of the same month, they learned not much later. There was anxiety for them before the rumor arrived, not so much about themselves as about the Greeks, lest Hellas should stumble around Mardonius. But as this rumor entered into them, they made their approach somewhat more and faster. So then, the Greeks and the barbarians hastened to the battle, as if the islands and the Hellespont were set before them as prizes.
102. To the Athenians and those nearest to them, who made up about half of the line, the path led along the beach and flat ground, while for the Lacedaemonians and those next to them in the line, it went through a ravine and hills. As the Lacedaemonians went around, those on the other wing had already begun to fight. Now, as long as the Persians' shields were upright, they defended themselves and held their ground in the battle. But when the Athenians and their neighbors, eager to accomplish their task before the Lacedaemonians, fought more fiercely, the situation changed. Forcing down the shields, they charged together and fell upon the Persians, who initially resisted but eventually fled to the wall. The Athenians, Corinthians, Sicyonians, and Troezenians (for they were arranged next to each other) pursued them closely and stormed in together. And when the wall was taken, the barbarians no longer turned to defense but fled, except for the Persians, who formed small groups and fought against the Greeks who entered the wall. Of the Persian commanders, two escaped and two perished: Artayntes and Ithanitres, the fleet admirals, escaped, while Mardontes and Tigranes, the land army generals, died fighting.
103. Yet, while the Persians were still fighting, the Lacedaemonians and those with them arrived, and they completed the remaining tasks. And indeed, many of the Greeks fell there, both others and the Sicyonians and their general Perilaus. And the Samians, who were serving in the Median camp and had been disarmed, as soon as they saw that the battle was becoming doubtful from the beginning, they did as much as they could, wanting to help the Greeks. And when the other Ionians saw the Samians starting, they too, in this way, deserted from the Persians and attacked the barbarians.
104. To the Milesians, indeed, the Persians had assigned the task of guarding the passes for their own safety, so that if something should happen to them, as indeed it did, they might be led safely to the heights of Mycale by having guides. Now the Milesians were assigned to this task for this reason and so that they might not be present in the camp and cause some new trouble; but they did everything contrary to what had been assigned, both leading them on other paths as they fled, which indeed led to their enemies, and finally they themselves became their worst enemies, killing them. Thus, indeed, Ionia revolted from the Persians for the second time.
105. In this battle, the Athenians indeed excelled among the Greeks, and among the Athenians, Hermolycus, the son of Euthoenus, a man who had trained in the pancratium. This Hermolycus, later after these events, during a war between the Athenians and the Carystians, was found dead in a battle in Cyrnus of the Carystian territory, lying at Geraestus. And after the Athenians, the Corinthians, Troezenians, and Sicyonians excelled.
106. When the Greeks had defeated many of the barbarians, both those fighting and those fleeing, they burned the ships and the entire wall, having brought the spoils out to the shore, and they found some treasures of money. And having set fire to the wall and the ships, they sailed away. And when the Greeks arrived at Samos, they deliberated about the restoration of Ionia, and in which part of Greece it was necessary to settle, which they themselves had power over, and to leave Ionia to the barbarians. For it seemed to them impossible to guard the Ionians for all time, and if they did not guard them, they had no hope that the Ionians would have any chance of rejoicing to be freed from the Persians. In response to this, it seemed good to the Peloponnesians who were in authority to make the Greeks who had sided with the Medes rise up from their coastal lands and give the land to the Ionians to inhabit, but it did not seem good to the Athenians for Ionia to become unsettled from the beginning, nor for the Peloponnesians to deliberate about their own colonies. And while these were strongly opposing, the Peloponnesians yielded. And thus, they made the Samians, Chians, Lesbians, and the other islanders, who happened to be serving together with the Greeks, into allies, having taken hold of trust and oaths to remain and not to stand apart. And having taken hold of these oaths, they sailed to break the bridges, for they still thought they would find them stretched out. These, indeed, were sailing to the Hellespont.
107. Of the barbarians who had escaped and were driven to the heights of Mycale, there were not many, and they made their way to Sardis. As they were traveling along the road, Masistes, the son of Darius, happening upon the disaster that had occurred, spoke many harsh words to the general Artayntes, among other things saying that he was worse than a woman for having led in such a manner, and that he deserved every kind of evil for having harmed the king's house. Among the Persians, to hear that one is worse than a woman is the greatest insult. Artayntes, having heard much of this, became furious and drew his sword upon Masistes, wanting to kill him. But as he was attacking, Xenagoras, the son of Praxilaus, a man from Halicarnassus, who was standing behind Artayntes, seized him by the middle and lifting him up, threw him to the ground. At this point, the bodyguards of Masistes stepped forward. Xenagoras did these things, seeking to gain favor with both Masistes and Xerxes, by saving the brother of the latter. And because of this deed, Xenagoras was given by the king the rule over all of Cilicia. As for those who were traveling along the road, nothing more than this happened, but they arrived in Sardis.
108. At that time, the king happened to be in Sardis since that period when, having fled from Athens after suffering a naval defeat, he arrived there. Then, indeed, being in Sardis, he fell in love with the wife of Masistes, who was also there. But when he sent messages to her, he was unable to persuade her, nor did he use force, considering his brother Masistes. The same thing was true for the woman, for she knew well that she would not be taken by force. So then, Xerxes, working on other matters, arranged this marriage for his own son Darius, the daughter of this woman and Masistes, thinking that she would be more likely to yield if he did this. Having made the arrangements and performed the customary rites, he departed for Susa. But when he arrived there and brought the wife to his son Darius, he ceased pursuing Masistes' wife, and instead, having changed his mind, he fell in love with and happened to win over the wife of Darius, who was also the daughter of Masistes. And the name of this woman was Artaynte.
109. As time went on, the truth came to light in this way. Amestris, the wife of Xerxes, wove a large, colorful cloak, worthy of admiration, and gave it to Xerxes. He, being pleased, put it on and went to Artaynte. Being pleased with her as well, he ordered her to ask for whatever she wanted to be given to her in return for her services to him, for she would obtain everything she asked for. But she, for it was necessary for her whole family to suffer misfortune, said to Xerxes, "Will you give me whatever I ask for?" He, thinking that she would ask for anything rather than that, promised and swore. But when he swore, she fearlessly asked for the cloak. Xerxes, however, became very distressed, not wanting to give it, not for any other reason, but fearing Amestris, lest she, who had been suspecting the things that were happening, be found out in this way. But he offered her a city, boundless gold, and an army, which no one was going to rule except her. Indeed, the army is a very Persian gift. But he could not persuade her, so he gave her the cloak. And she, being very happy with the gift, wore it and took great delight in it.
110. And Amestris found out that she had received it; but when she learned what was being done, she did not hold anger against this woman, but hoping that her mother was the cause and that she was doing these things, she planned destruction for the wife of Masistes. And she waited for her husband Xerxes to prepare the royal feast: and this feast is prepared once a year on the day when he became king. And the name of this feast in the Persian language is tukta, but in the Greek language, it is perfect: then the king alone anoints his head and gives gifts to the Persians. Having waited for this day, Amestris asked Xerxes to give her the wife of Masistes. And he thought it terrible and wicked to give his brother's wife, and she was innocent of this matter: for he understood for what reason she asked.
111. However, in the end, as she persisted and he was compelled by the law, which states that it is impossible for them to refuse when the royal banquet is set before them, he reluctantly agreed and arranged it in this way: he ordered her to do as she wished, and having summoned his brother, he said the following. "Masistes, you are a son of Darius and my brother, and moreover, you are a good man. Therefore, do not live with this wife you have now, but instead, I give you my daughter in her place. Live with her, and do not keep the wife you have now, for it does not seem right to me." Masistes, astonished by these words, said the following. "My lord, what useless words you speak to me, ordering me to leave my wife, from whom I have young sons and daughters, one of whom you have even taken as a wife for your son. She is very much to my liking, and you order me to leave her and marry your daughter? I, O king, greatly appreciate being deemed worthy of your daughter, but I will do neither of these things. Do not force me to agree to such a matter in any way. Another man will appear for your daughter who is no less than me, and let me live with my wife." He replied with such words, and Xerxes, becoming angry, said the following. "So be it, Masistes, it is done: for I will neither give you my daughter to marry, nor will you live with that wife any longer, so that you may learn to accept what is given." And when he heard this, he said only this much and went out, "My lord, you have not yet destroyed me."
112. In the meantime, while Xerxes was conversing with his brother, Amestris, having summoned the guards of Xerxes, mutilated the wife of Masistes: cutting off her breasts and throwing them to the dogs, as well as her nose, ears, and lips, and also cutting out her tongue, she sent her back to her house, having been horribly disfigured.
113. But Masistes, having heard nothing of these things, and expecting something bad to befall him, rushed by foot to his house. And seeing his wife mutilated, immediately after this, having consulted with his children, he went to Bactra with both his own sons and also some others, as if he would incite a revolt in the Bactrian province and cause the greatest evils to the king: which indeed would have happened, as it seems to me, if only he had reached the Bactrians and the Sacae; for they loved him and he was the viceroy of the Bactrians. But Xerxes, learning of these things that he was doing, sent an army against him on the way and killed both him and his sons and his army. So much happened concerning the love of Xerxes and the death of Masistes.
114. The Greeks, having set out from Mycale towards the Hellespont, first moored near Lectum, being hindered by the winds; then they arrived at Abydos and found the bridges broken apart, which they thought they would find still stretched out, and for this reason, not least, they came to the Hellespont. Now, for those around Leutychides, the Peloponnesians, it seemed best to sail away to Hellas, but for the Athenians and Xanthippus, their general, to remain and attempt the Chersonesus. So, indeed, the others sailed away, but the Athenians, having crossed from Abydos to the Chersonesus, besieged Sestus.
115. Upon hearing that the Greeks had arrived at the Hellespont, they gathered at this Sestus, as it was the strongest fortification in the area, from both the other neighboring towns and indeed from the city of Cardia, a Persian man named Oeobazus, who had transported the bridge equipment there. The local Aeolians held this place, but there were also Persians and a large crowd of other allies gathered together.
116. This region was ruled by Xerxes' governor, Artayctes, a man indeed Persian, cunning and reckless, who also deceived the king when he marched to Athens, taking the treasures of Protesilaus, son of Iphiclus, from Elaeus. For in Elaeus of the Chersonesus, there is a tomb of Protesilaus and a sacred precinct around it, where there were many treasures, and golden and silver bowls, and bronze, and clothing, and other offerings, which Artayctes plundered with the king's permission. And saying such things, he slandered Xerxes. "Master, there is a house of a Greek man here, who, having campaigned against your land, justly met his death: give me this man's house, so that someone may learn not to campaign against your land." Saying this, he was about to easily persuade Xerxes to give the man's house, with nothing suspected of what he intended. But he said that Protesilaus campaigned against the king's land, thinking such things: the Persians consider all Asia to be theirs and of the one who is always king. And when it was given, he carried the treasures from Elaeus to Sestus, and he sowed and plowed the sacred precinct, and he himself, whenever he went to Elaeus, had intercourse with women in the inner sanctuary. But then he was besieged by the Athenians, neither prepared for a siege nor expecting the Greeks, and they had unavoidably fallen upon him.
117. But when autumn came upon them as they were besieged, and the Athenians were growing weary both from being away from their own land and from being unable to take the wall, they asked their generals to somehow lead them back; but the generals said they would not do so until they either took the place or the Athenian assembly sent for them. Thus, indeed, they were fond of the present circumstances.
118. The people within the walls had already reached every kind of misery, so much so that they were boiling the straps of their beds to eat. Then, when they no longer had even these, indeed, under the cover of night, both the Persians and Artayctes and Oeobazus escaped, descending behind the wall where it was most deserted by the enemy. But when day came, the people of Chersonese signaled to the Athenians from the towers what had happened and opened the gates. Of the Athenians, some pursued, while others held the city.
119. Now indeed, Oeobazus, attempting to escape to Thrace, was captured by the Thracian Apsinthians, who sacrificed him to their local god Plistorus in their own manner, and killed those with him in another way. And those around Artayctes, having set out to flee later, and as they were caught being few beyond the Goat's Rivers, defending themselves for a long time, some died and some were captured alive. And the Greeks, having bound them, led them to Sestus, along with Artayctes himself and his son, both bound.
120. And indeed, to one of the guards watching, it is said by the people of Chersonese that such a strange event occurred while he was frying dried fish: the fish, lying on the fire, began to jump and wriggle as if they were newly caught. And while those around were amazed, Artayctes, when he saw the strange event, called the one frying the fish and said, "Athenian stranger, do not fear this strange event: for it has not appeared to you, but it signifies to me that Protesilaus in Elaeus, even though he is dead and a dried fish, has power from the gods to take revenge on the one who wronged him. Now then, I am willing to impose these penalties on myself: to pay a hundred talents to the god for the money I took from the temple, and for myself and my son, I will give two hundred talents to the Athenians if I am spared." Offering these things, he did not persuade the general Xanthippus; for the people of Elaeus, seeking revenge for Protesilaus, demanded that he be punished, and the general's mind was inclined in this direction. And having led him away to the place where Xerxes had bridged the strait (or, as some say, to the hill above the city of Madytus), they nailed him to planks and hanged him; and his son, they stoned to death before the eyes of Artayctes.
121. Having done these things, they sailed away to Greece, carrying both the other possessions and indeed also the cables of the bridges, as they were to dedicate them to the temples. And in this year, nothing more than these things happened.
122. Artayctes, the one who was crucified, is the grandson of Artembares, who proposed an idea to the Persians that they, in turn, presented to Cyrus, saying the following: "Since Zeus has given leadership to the Persians, and to you, Cyrus, having conquered Astyages, let us leave this small and rugged land and settle in a better one. There are many neighboring lands, and many more beyond, of which if we take one, we will be more admired. It is fitting for ruling men to do such things; for when will we have a better opportunity than when we rule over many people and all of Asia?" Cyrus, having heard these things and not being surprised by the idea, ordered them to do this, but he also advised them to prepare themselves as if they would no longer be rulers but rather be ruled: for he said that soft lands produce soft men, and it is not possible for the same land to produce both wonderful crops and men who are good in war. So, the Persians, understanding this, withdrew, having been persuaded by Cyrus' opinion, and they chose to rule, living in a harsh land, rather than to cultivate the plains and be slaves to others.