This is the display of the inquiry of Herodotus of Halicarnassus, so that the deeds of men may not become faded with time, nor great and marvelous works, some by Greeks and some by non-Greeks, become without fame; and also the other things, and for what reason they waged war against each other.
Now the learned Persians say that the Phoenicians were the cause of the dispute. For these, coming from the so-called Red Sea, arrived at this sea and, having settled in this region which they still inhabit, immediately engaged in long voyages, and carrying Egyptian and Assyrian merchandise, they came to other places and indeed to Argos. Now Argos at this time surpassed all the regions in what is now called Greece. The Phoenicians, having arrived at this Argos, set out their cargo. On the fifth or sixth day after they arrived, when almost everything was sold, many women, including the king's daughter, came to the sea; her name was, according to both the Persians and the Greeks, Io, the daughter of Inachus. These women, standing by the stern of the ship, were buying the merchandise they most desired; and the Phoenicians, having given the order, rushed upon them. Indeed, most of the women escaped, but Io, along with others, was seized. Having been thrown into the ship, they sailed away to Egypt.
Thus indeed, the Persians say Io arrived in Egypt, not as the Greeks say, and this was the first of the wrongdoings to begin. After this, they say some Greeks (for they do not know their name) sailed to Tyre in Phoenicia and seized the king's daughter Europa. These would have been Cretans. So, these things happened equally for them. After this, the Greeks were the cause of the second wrongdoing: for having sailed with a long ship to Aea in Colchis and to the Phasis River, from there, having accomplished the other things for which they came, they seized the king's daughter Medea. The king of the Colchians sent a herald to Greece to demand justice for the abduction and to ask for his daughter back. But the Greeks replied that they themselves had not received justice for the abduction of Io from Argos, so they would not give it to them.
And they say that in the second generation after this, Alexandrus, the son of Priam, having heard these things, desired to have a wife from Greece through abduction for himself, knowing well that he would not give justice, for neither did they give it. Thus indeed, having seized Helen, it seemed to the Greeks that they first sent messengers to demand Helen back and to ask for justice for the abduction. But when they proposed these things, the Trojans brought up the abduction of Medea, saying that since they themselves did not give justice nor return what was demanded, they should not expect to receive justice from others.
Up to this point indeed, they say there were only abductions from one another, but from this point on, the Greeks became greatly responsible: for they began to wage war in Asia before the Persians did in Europe. Now, they consider the act of abducting women to be the work of unjust men, but to make an effort to avenge the abducted is the work of foolish men, and to have no concern for the abducted is the work of wise men: for it is clear that if the women themselves did not want it, they would not have been abducted. The Persians say that they themselves made no issue of the abduction of their women from Asia, but the Greeks, on account of a woman from Lacedaemon, gathered a great expedition and then came to Asia and destroyed the power of Priam. From this point on, they have always considered the Greek nation to be their enemy. For the Persians think that they inhabit Asia and the barbarian nations that dwell there, while they consider Europe and the Greek nation to be separated.
Thus indeed the Persians say it happened, and they find the beginning of their enmity towards the Greeks to be due to the capture of Troy. But concerning Io, the Phoenicians do not agree with the Persians in this way: for they do not say that they abducted her by force and brought her to Egypt, but rather that she had intercourse with the ship's captain in Argos, and when she learned she was pregnant, out of shame for her parents, she willingly sailed away with the Phoenicians, so as not to be exposed. These things are said by the Persians and the Phoenicians. But as for me, I do not go about saying that these things happened this way or somehow otherwise; but I know that the one who first began unjust deeds against the Greeks, this one I will mark and proceed to the rest of the account, going through both small and large cities of men alike. For those that were great in the past are now small, and many that were great in my time were small before. Knowing that human prosperity never remains in the same place, I will remember both alike.
Croesus was of Lydian origin, the son of Alyattes, and ruler of the nations within the Halys River, which flows from the south between the Syrians and the Paphlagonians and goes out towards the north wind into the sea called Euxine. This Croesus was the first barbarian whom we know to have subjugated some Greeks to the payment of tribute and to have made friends with others. He subjugated the Ionians, the Aeolians, and the Dorians who were in Asia, and he made friends with the Lacedaemonians. Before the rule of Croesus, all Greeks were free. For the army of the Cimmerians, which came to Ionia before the time of Croesus, was not a destruction of the cities but a raid for plunder.
The leadership thus passed, being of the descendants of Heracles, to the family of Croesus, called the Mermnadae. There was Candaules, whom the Greeks call Myrsilus, a tyrant of Sardis, a descendant of Alcaeus, the son of Heracles. For Agron, the son of Ninus, the son of Belus, the son of Alcaeus, was the first of the Heraclidae to become king of Sardis, and Candaules, the son of Myrsus, was the last. The kings who ruled this land before Agron were descendants of Lydus, the son of Atys, from whom the whole Lydian people were named, previously called Meii. From these, the Heraclidae, having been entrusted with the rule, held it due to an oracle, being born from a slave woman of Iardanus and Heracles, ruling for twenty-two generations of men, five hundred and five years, with the son receiving the rule from the father, until Candaules, the son of Myrsus.
This Candaules, then, being in love with his own wife, thought her to be by far the most beautiful of all women. And so, thinking this, he had Gyges, the son of Dascylus, who was his spear-bearer and most favored, to whom Candaules entrusted the most serious of his affairs and even praised the appearance of his wife. Not much time passed (for it was necessary for Candaules to suffer misfortune) when he spoke to Gyges as follows: "Gyges, I do not think you believe me when I speak about the appearance of my wife (for ears are more distrustful than eyes), so do something so that you may see her naked." But Gyges, groaning, said, "Master, what unhealthy words you speak, ordering me to see my mistress naked? When a woman takes off her tunic, she also takes off her modesty. Long ago, good things were discovered for people, from which it is necessary to learn: among these is this one, to look at one's own things. But I believe that she is the most beautiful of all women, and I beg you not to ask me to do something lawless."
Speaking thus, he resisted, fearing that some harm might come to him from it, but Candaules answered with these words: "Take courage, Gyges, and do not fear either me, as if I were testing you by saying this, nor my wife, lest any harm should come to you from her. For I will devise a plan so that she will not even know that she has been seen by you. I will place you in the room where we sleep, behind the opened door. After I enter, my wife will also come to bed. There is a chair near the entrance; she will lay down each of her garments on it as she undresses, and she will provide you with a great opportunity to look at her quietly. When she steps from the chair towards the bed and turns her back to you, it is your concern then to make sure she does not see you going out through the door."
So, being unable to escape, he was ready; and when Candaules thought it was time for bed, he led Gyges into the room. And soon after, the wife also came. As she entered and placed her clothes, Gyges watched her. But when the woman turned her back, going to the bed, he slipped out, and the wife saw him leaving. Having learned what had been done by her husband, she neither cried out in shame nor seemed to know, having in mind to take revenge on Candaules. For among the Lydians, and almost among all other barbarians as well, it brings great shame for even a man to be seen naked.
At that time, indeed, she showed no sign and kept silent. But as soon as day had come as quickly as possible, she prepared those of her household servants whom she knew to be most trustworthy and called Gyges. He, thinking that she knew nothing of what had happened, came when called; for he was accustomed to go whenever the queen called him. But when Gyges arrived, the woman said these things: "Now, Gyges, I give you a choice of two paths, and you may choose which one you wish to follow. Either kill Candaules and have me and the kingdom of the Lydians, or you must die yourself right now, so that you may not see all things obeying Candaules and what you should not see. But either he who devised this must be destroyed, or you who saw me naked and did what is not customary." Gyges at first was amazed at what was said, but then he begged her not to force him to make such a decision. However, he could not persuade her, but truly a necessary choice was set before him: either to kill his master or to be killed by others. He chose to survive himself. Then he said these things: "Since you force me to kill my master unwillingly, let me hear by what means and in what way we will attack him." She, taking up the conversation, said, "The attack will come from the same place where he showed me naked to you, and the attempt will be made while he is asleep."
But when they had prepared the plot, night having come (for Gyges did not refuse, nor was there any escape for him, but he had to either die himself or kill Candaules), he followed the woman into the bedroom, and she, giving him a dagger, hid him under the same door. And after that, as Candaules was resting, Gyges slipped out and killed him, and he gained both the woman and the kingdom. Gyges was also remembered by Archilochus of Paros, who lived at the same time, in iambic trimeter.
Gyges indeed held the kingdom and was strengthened by the oracle in Delphi. For as the Lydians were greatly troubled by the fate of Candaules and were in arms, both the partisans of Gyges and the rest of the Lydians came to an agreement, that if the oracle should declare him to be king of the Lydians, he would reign; but if not, he would give back the rule to the Heraclidae. The oracle indeed declared it, and thus Gyges became king. However, the Pythian priestess said that vengeance would come to the Heraclidae in the fifth generation of Gyges. Neither the Lydians nor their kings made any account of this word until it was fulfilled.
Thus indeed the tyranny was held by the Mermnadae, driving out the Heraclidae, and Gyges, having become a tyrant, sent many dedicatory offerings to Delphi, not a few; of silver dedicatory offerings, there are the most in Delphi, and besides the silver, he dedicated much gold, both other things and especially those worthy of mention, six golden mixing bowls. These stand in the treasury of the Corinthians, having a weight of thirty talents; but in truth, using a true account, the treasury is not of the Corinthians' public property, but of Cypselus, son of Eetion. This Gyges was the first of the barbarians whom we know to have dedicated offerings in Delphi after Midas, son of Gordias, king of Phrygia. For indeed Midas dedicated the royal throne on which he sat to give judgment, being a thing worthy of wonder; and this throne lies where the mixing bowls of Gyges are. This gold and silver which Gyges dedicated is called "Gygian" by the Delphians, named after the one who dedicated it.
Now indeed this man also led an army when he began to rule, both against Miletus and against Smyrna, and he captured the city of Colophon; but since no other great deed was done by him, reigning for two less than forty years, we will pass him by, having mentioned so much, and I will make mention of Ardys, son of Gyges, who became king after Gyges. This man captured the Prienians and attacked Miletus, and during his tyranny of Sardis, the Cimmerians, driven from their lands by the nomadic Scythians, came to Asia and captured Sardis, except for the acropolis.
Now indeed, Ardys, having ruled for one less than fifty years, was succeeded by Sadyattes, son of Ardys, and he ruled for twelve years, and after Sadyattes, Alyattes. This man waged war against Cyaxares, the descendant of Deioces, and the Medes, and he drove the Cimmerians out of Asia, and he captured Smyrna, which was founded from Colophon, and he attacked Clazomenae. Now indeed, from these things, he did not withdraw as he wished, but suffered greatly; however, being in power, he received other deeds most worthy of mention, these things.
He waged war against the Milesians, having inherited the war from his father. For he attacked and besieged Miletus in this manner: whenever there was abundant fruit on the land, at that time he sent in the army; and he campaigned with the accompaniment of pipes and harps and flutes, both female and male. But when he arrived in the Milesian territory, he neither tore down the houses that were in the fields nor set them on fire nor tore off their doors, but let them stand in the country; and as for the trees and the fruit that was on the land, he destroyed them and then withdrew. For the Milesians had control of the sea, so that it was not possible for the army to be effective. The Lydian did not tear down the houses for these reasons, so that the Milesians, having a base there, might sow and work the land, and he himself, while they were working, might have something to plunder and invade.
Doing these things, he waged war for eleven years, during which great double-sided wounds of the Milesians occurred, both in the Limeneion of their own territory, having fought, and in the plain of the Maeander. Now indeed, for six of the eleven years, Sadyattes, son of Ardys, still ruled the Lydians, who also sent the army into the Milesian territory at that time; for this Sadyattes was also the one who had begun the war. But for the following five years of the eleven, Alyattes, son of Sadyattes, waged war, who, having inherited, as has been shown to me before, the war from his father, applied himself intensely. To the Milesians, none of the Ionians lightened this war except the Chians alone. These, giving back the like, avenged; for indeed, earlier, the Milesians had helped the Chians in their war against the Erythraeans.
In the twelfth year, with the plunder being set on fire by the army, it happened that such a thing occurred: as soon as the plunder was set on fire, driven by the wind, it caught the temple of Athena, called Assesian, and the temple, having been caught, was burned down. And immediately, no word was made, but after the army returned to Sardis, Alyattes fell ill. And as his illness became longer, he sent to Delphi for oracles, whether indeed someone advised him, or he himself thought to send and consult the god about the illness. But the Pythian, when they arrived at Delphi, said that she would not give an oracle until they restored the temple of Athena, which they had burned down in the territory of the Milesians at Assesos.
I know from the Delphians that it happened this way: the Milesians, however, add these things to those, that Periander, being the son of Cypselus and a very close friend to Thrasybulus, who was then ruling as a tyrant of Miletus, having learned the oracle that had been given to Alyattes, sent a messenger to tell him, so that, having some foreknowledge, he might plan for the present situation.
Now the Milesians say that it happened this way. But Alyattes, when these things were reported to him, immediately sent a herald to Miletus, wanting to make a truce with both Thrasybulus and the Milesians for as long as he would build the temple. Indeed, the messenger was sent to Miletus, but Thrasybulus, having clearly learned everything beforehand and knowing what Alyattes was going to do, devised such a plan: he gathered all the grain in the city, both his own and private, and brought it to the marketplace, and told the Milesians that when he himself gave the signal, then everyone should drink and celebrate with one another.
Thrasybulus did and announced these things for this reason, so that the herald from Sardis, seeing both a large heap of grain poured out and the people in a state of enjoyment, would report it to Alyattes: and indeed, this happened. For when the herald saw those things and spoke to Thrasybulus the commands of the Lydian, he went back to Sardis, and as I learn, the reconciliation happened for no other reason. For Alyattes, hoping that there was a strong famine in Miletus and that the people were worn down to the utmost misery, heard from the herald returning from Miletus the opposite story than what he himself had expected. And after this, both the reconciliation happened for them, on the condition that they would be friends and allies to each other, and Alyattes built two temples instead of one for Athena at Assesos, and he himself recovered from his illness. This is how it went for Alyattes in the war against the Milesians and Thrasybulus.
This Periander was the son of Cypselus, the one who revealed the oracle to Thrasybulus; and Periander ruled over Corinth. The Corinthians say (and the Lesbians agree with them) that the greatest marvel happened to him in his life: Arion of Methymna was carried on a dolphin to Taenarus, being a lyre-player second to none of those then existing, and the first of men whom we know to have composed and named and taught the dithyramb in Corinth.
They say that this Arion, who spent much time with Periander, desired to sail to Italy and Sicily, and having earned a great amount of money, wished to return back to Corinth. Now he set out from Tarentum, and trusting no one more than the Corinthians, he hired a ship of Corinthian men. These men at sea plotted to throw Arion overboard and possess his money. He, understanding this, begged them, offering his money to them and asking for his life in return. But he could not persuade them, and they ordered the ferryman either to kill himself so that he might be buried on land, or to jump into the sea as quickly as possible. Arion, being in distress, asked if, since they thought it best, he might put on all his attire and stand in his finery and sing. And after singing, he promised to kill himself. For the men, it was a pleasure to hear the best singer among men, so they withdrew from the stern to the middle of the ship. Arion, putting on all his attire and taking his lyre, stood in his finery and sang the "Stirring Song." And when the song was finished, he threw himself into the sea, as he was, with all his attire. The men sailed away to Corinth, but they say that a dolphin took Arion and carried him to Taenarus. And disembarking there, he went to Corinth with all his attire, and upon arriving, he told everything that had happened. Periander, however, out of disbelief, kept Arion in custody, not allowing him to go anywhere, and he had the ferryman seized. When they arrived, he asked them if they had any news about Arion. They said that he was safe in Italy and that they had left him doing well in Tarentum. Then Arion appeared to them, just as he had jumped out, and the men, being astonished, could no longer deny it when they were accused. Now, the Corinthians and Lesbians tell this story, and there is a small bronze offering of Arion at Taenarus, a man upon a dolphin.
And Alyattes the Lydian, having carried on the war against the Milesians, afterwards came to his end, having ruled for fifty-seven years. Having escaped the illness, this man of the same family dedicated at Delphi a large silver bowl and an iron stand welded together, worthy of sight above all the offerings at Delphi, the work of Glaucus the Chian, who alone of all men found out the welding of iron.
And when Alyattes had come to his end, Croesus the son of Alyattes, being of the age of thirty-five years, took over the kingdom. He first made an attack on the Ephesians among the Greeks. Then indeed, the Ephesians, being besieged by him, dedicated their city to Artemis, extending a rope from the temple to the wall. And there are seven stades between the old city, which was then besieged, and the temple. First, indeed, Croesus attacked these people, and then, one by one, he attacked each of the Ionians and Aeolians, bringing different charges against different people, finding greater charges against some, accusing them of greater things, and bringing lesser charges against others.
And when the Greeks in Asia had been reduced to the payment of tribute, he then planned to build ships and to attack the island Greeks. And when everything was ready for the shipbuilding, some say that Bias of Priene came to Sardis, while others say it was Pittacus of Mytilene, and when Croesus asked if there was any new thing concerning Greece, he said the following to stop the shipbuilding: "O king, the islanders are gathering ten thousand horses, having in mind to march against Sardis and you." And Croesus, hoping that he was speaking the truth, said, "Would that the gods put it into the minds of the islanders to come against the sons of the Lydians with horses!" And the other, taking it up, said, "O king, you seem to me to be eagerly desiring to catch the islanders riding horses on the mainland, having a reasonable hope. But what do you think the islanders desire more than, as soon as they heard that you were about to build ships against them, to catch the Lydians at sea, so that they might avenge you for the Greeks who dwell on the mainland, whom you have enslaved?" And Croesus was very pleased with the argument, and it seemed to him to be well said, and persuaded by it, he stopped the shipbuilding. And thus he made a treaty of friendship with the Ionians who inhabited the islands.
And as time went on and nearly all those dwelling within the Halys River had been subdued - for apart from the Cilicians and Lycians, he had brought all the others under his control, Croesus the conqueror. And these are the following: Lydians, Phrygians, Mysians, Mariandynians, Chalybes, Paphlagonians, Thracian Thynians and Bithynians, Carians, Ionians, Dorians, Aeolians, and Pamphylians. And with these subdued and added to the Lydians by Croesus,
Arriving in Sardis, which was flourishing in wealth, were all the wise men from Greece who happened to be at that time, each of them arriving as they did, and indeed Solon, an Athenian man, who, having made laws for the Athenians at their request, went abroad for ten years, setting sail under the pretext of sightseeing, so that he would not be forced to undo any of the laws he had established. For the Athenians themselves were not able to do it: they were bound by great oaths to use the laws that Solon had set for them for ten years.
Of these very reasons, then, and for the sake of sightseeing, Solon went abroad to Egypt to visit Amasis, and indeed to Sardis to visit Croesus. And upon arriving, he was entertained as a guest in the royal palace by Croesus. And after the third or fourth day, Croesus ordered his servants to lead Solon around the treasuries, and they showed him everything that was great and fortunate. And after he had seen everything and considered it as was fitting, Croesus asked him the following: "Foreigner from Athens, for indeed much talk about you has come to us, both on account of your wisdom and your wandering, as you have traveled much of the earth for the sake of sightseeing. Now, then, I have a desire to ask you if you have seen anyone who is most fortunate of all." He, expecting to be the most fortunate of men, asked this; but Solon, without flattery but using the truth, said, "O king, Tellus the Athenian." And Croesus, astonished at what was said, asked in return, "On what grounds do you judge Tellus to be the most fortunate?" And he said, "Tellus had this: children who were both beautiful and good, and he saw all of them born and all of them survive. And with his life going well, as things are among us, the end of his life was most glorious: for when a battle occurred between the Athenians and their neighbors in Eleusis, he came to their aid, and having made a rout of the enemies, he died most nobly, and the Athenians buried him publicly where he fell and honored him greatly."
Thus, having urged Croesus with the many and fortunate things about Tellus, Solon was asked who he saw as second after him, thinking that he would surely receive the second place. And he said, "Cleobis and Biton. For these, being of Argive descent, had a sufficient life, and in addition to this, such bodily strength: both were equally athletes, and indeed this story is told. During a festival for Hera among the Argives, it was necessary for their mother to be carried by a yoke to the temple, but the oxen did not arrive from the field in time. Being pressed by the hour, the young men themselves went under the yoke and pulled the wagon, and their mother rode on it. And having carried her for forty-five stadia, they arrived at the temple. And having done this and been seen by the whole assembly, the end of their life was the best, and the god showed in these matters that it is better for a man to die than to live. For the Argive men stood around and blessed the strength of the young men, and the Argive women blessed their mother, for having borne such children. And the mother, being very happy with the deed and the fame, stood opposite the statue and prayed to Hera for her children, Cleobis and Biton, who had greatly honored her, that the goddess would give what is best for a man to obtain. And after this prayer, they sacrificed and feasted, and the young men, having gone to sleep in the temple itself, no longer rose but were held in this end. And the Argives, having made statues of them, dedicated them at Delphi, as having become the best."
Solon, indeed, assigned these men the second place in happiness, but Croesus, being vexed, said, "O foreigner from Athens, does our happiness seem so insignificant to you that you do not even deem us worthy of ordinary men?" And he said, "O Croesus, knowing that the divine is altogether envious and tumultuous, you ask me about human affairs. For in the long course of time, there are many things to see that one does not wish, and many things to suffer. For I set the limit of a man's life at seventy years. These years, being seventy, produce 25,200 days, not counting the intercalary month. But if indeed one wishes to make the years longer by adding the intercalary month, so that the seasons arrive at the proper time, there will be thirty-five intercalary months in the seventy years, and from these months, 1,050 days. Of all these days in the seventy years, being 26,250, no one day brings anything exactly like another. So, then, Croesus, all human life is a matter of chance. And to me, you seem to be very rich and to be king of many people, but I cannot yet say that, until I hear that you have ended your life well. For the very rich man is no more fortunate than the one who has enough for the day, unless fortune accompanies him to have everything beautiful and to end his life well. For many very rich men are unfortunate, and many who have a moderate livelihood are fortunate. The very rich but unfortunate man has two advantages over the fortunate man, only this one has many advantages over that one: the former is better able to fulfill his desires and to bear great misfortune, but the latter has advantages over the former in these respects: he is not equally able to bear misfortune or fulfill his desires, but good fortune wards these off from him, and he is free from deformity, without suffering any evil, and having good children and being beautiful. And if, in addition to these things, he also ends his life well, this is the man you seek, who is worthy to be called fortunate. But before he dies, one must hold back and not call him fortunate, but rather lucky. For it is impossible for one man to bring together all these things, just as no land is self-sufficient in what it produces, but it has one thing and lacks another, and the land that has the most is the best. So too, no human body is self-sufficient: it has one thing but lacks another. And whoever, having the most of these things, continues through life and then dies well, this man, O king, in my opinion, is worthy to bear this name.
Saying these things to Croesus, he neither pleased him nor, having made him of no account, sent him away, greatly thinking him to be ignorant, as he advised to look at the end of everything, disregarding the present goods.
After Solon's departure, a great divine punishment befell Croesus, as one might suppose, because he considered himself to be the most fortunate of all men. Immediately, a dream appeared to him while he was sleeping, which showed him the truth of the future evils concerning his son. Croesus had two sons, one of whom was disabled, for he was indeed deaf, while the other was far superior to all his peers in everything; his name was Atys. So, this dream indicated to Croesus that Atys would be killed by an iron spear. When he woke up and considered the matter, being greatly alarmed by the dream, he arranged a marriage for his son, and although he was accustomed to commanding the Lydians, he no longer sent him on any such mission. He also removed all javelins, spears, and all such things that men use for war from the men's quarters and stored them in the chambers, lest any of them hanging might fall upon his son.
While he had his son's wedding in hand, a man arrived in Sardis, burdened with misfortune and with unclean hands, being of Phrygian birth and of the royal family. This man went to Croesus' house and, according to the local customs, requested to be purified. Croesus then purified him, and the purification was similar to that of the Lydians and the Greeks. After Croesus had done the customary things, he inquired from where and who he was, saying the following: "Man, being who and coming from where in Phrygia, have you become my suppliant? Whom of men or women did you kill?" The man answered, "O king, I am the son of Gordias, the son of Midas, and I am called Adrastus. Having killed my brother unintentionally, I am here, driven out by my father and deprived of everything." Croesus replied to him with these words: "You are the offspring of friends and have come to friends, where you will lack nothing, staying in our house, and bearing this misfortune as lightly as possible, you will gain the most."
During this time, Adrastus indeed had his dwelling in Croesus' house. In the same period, a great boar appeared in Mysian Olympus, which, rushing from this mountain, destroyed the works of the Mysians. Many times, the Mysians went out against it, but they did no harm and suffered from it instead. Finally, the Mysian messengers, coming to Croesus, said the following: "O king, a great boar has appeared in our land, which destroys our works. Eager to capture it, we are unable to do so. Now, therefore, we need you to send your son and chosen young men and dogs with us so that we may drive it out of the land." They indeed requested these things, but Croesus, remembering the dream, spoke these words to them: "Do not mention my son again, for I would not send him with you. For he is newly married, and this is his concern now. However, I will send chosen Lydians and all the hunting dogs, and I will instruct those who go to be as eager as possible to help you drive the beast out of the land."
Croesus answered thus, and the Mysians were satisfied with this. However, Croesus' son, having heard what the Mysians requested, spoke to him, since Croesus did not say he would send his son with them. The young man said the following: "O father, it was once the most honorable and noble for us to go to wars and to hunts, excelling in them. But now you have excluded me from both of these, neither seeing any cowardice in me nor any lack of spirit. How should I now appear in the eyes of those going to the marketplace and coming out of the marketplace? What kind of man will I seem to be to the citizens, and what kind of man to my newly married wife? And what kind of man will she think she lives with? Therefore, either allow me to go on the hunt, or persuade me with reason how it is better for me to do these things this way."
Croesus responded with these words: "O son, I am not doing these things for you, seeing neither cowardice nor any other displeasing thing, but a vision of a dream came to me in my sleep, saying that you would have a short life, for you would be destroyed by an iron spear. Because of this vision, I hastened this marriage for you, and I do not send you to the things you are taking part in, having protection, if somehow I might be able to keep you safe during my life. For you happen to be my only son, as I consider the other one, who is indeed destroyed by his hearing, to not be part of my life."
The young man responded with these words: "Father, I forgive you, indeed, for having seen such a vision, to have protection for me. But you do not understand, and the dream has escaped you, which is right for me to explain. You say that the dream declared that I would die by an iron spear. But what hands does a boar have, and what iron spear that you fear? For if it had said that I would die by a tooth or something else similar to this, it would be necessary for you to do what you are doing. But now, it is by a spear. Therefore, since our battle is not against men, allow me to go."
Croesus responded, "O son, you have indeed won me over by explaining your opinion about the dream. Therefore, since I have been persuaded by you, I change my mind and allow you to go on the hunt."
Having said these things, Croesus summoned the Phrygian Adrastus, and upon his arrival, he said the following: "Adrastus, I have cleansed you from your misfortune, which I do not reproach, and having received you into my home, I provide for all your expenses. Now, since you owe me for my good deeds towards you, I need you to become the guardian of my son as he sets out on the hunt, lest any wicked thieves appear on the road to harm you. Moreover, it is necessary for you to go where you can bring honor to your family, for it is both your ancestral duty and you still possess strength."
Adrastus responded, "O king, otherwise, I would not have gone to such a contest: for it is not fitting for someone who has experienced such misfortune to go among successful peers, and I have no desire to do so, and I would restrain myself in many ways. But now, since you urge me and I must repay your kindness (for I owe you a return of good deeds), I am ready to do these things, and to guard your son, whom you command me to protect, I expect him to return unharmed because of the one guarding him."
After this one, Adrastus, had replied to Croesus, they went forth afterward, equipped with chosen young men and dogs. Arriving at Mount Olympus, they sought the wild beast, and having found it and surrounded it in a circle, they were throwing their spears. Then indeed, the stranger, the one who had been cleansed of the murder, called Adrastus, while throwing his spear at the boar, misses it but hits the son of Croesus. He, struck by the spear, fulfilled the prophecy of the dream. And someone, going as a messenger to Croesus, reported to him the event that had happened, arriving in Sardis and signifying to him both the battle and the death of his son.
Croesus, being greatly disturbed by the death of his son, spoke more terribly because he himself had cleansed the man who killed him of murder. And being terribly distressed by the misfortune, he called upon Zeus the Purifier, bearing witness to the things suffered by the stranger; and he called upon Zeus of the Hearth and Zeus of Comrades, naming this same god, calling him Zeus of the Hearth, because indeed, having received the stranger, the murderer of his son, into his home, he was unaware while he was feeding him; and he called him Zeus of Comrades, as having sent him as a guardian, he found him to be the most hostile.
After this, the Lydians came, carrying the dead body, and the killer followed them. Standing before the corpse, this man handed himself over to Croesus, stretching out his hands, and ordered him to kill him over the dead body, speaking of his own previous misfortune, and how he had been destroyed by the one who had cleansed him, and that life was not bearable for him. But Croesus, hearing these things, pitied Adrastus, even though he was in such great personal distress, and said to him, "I have, O stranger, all the justice from you, since you condemn yourself to death. But you are not the only cause of this evil to me, except as much as you did it unwillingly, but rather some god, who also long ago signified to me the things that were going to be." Now Croesus buried his own son as was fitting. Adrastus, the son of Gordias, the son of Midas, who had become the murderer of his own brother and the murderer of the one who had cleansed him, when there was silence among the people around the tomb, recognizing that he was the most heavily afflicted of the people he knew, killed himself over the tomb.
Croesus, however, for two years remained in great mourning, deprived of his son. But after this, the rule of Astyages, the son of Cyaxares, was overthrown by Cyrus, the son of Cambyses, and the affairs of the Persians were growing. This not only stopped Croesus' grief but also led him to consider how he might, before the Persians became great, seize their growing power. Therefore, with this intention, he immediately tried the oracles, both those in Greece and that in Libya, sending others to different places: some to go to Delphi, others to Abae of the Phocians, and others to Dodona. Some were sent to Amphiaraus and to Trophonius, and others to Branchidae of Miletus. These were the Greek oracles to which Croesus sent to consult. But he sent others to consult Ammon in Libya. He sent them to test the oracles to see what they thought, so that if they were found to be thinking the truth, he would try them a second time, sending to ask whether he should undertake an expedition against the Persians.
Croesus, having instructed the Lydians, sent them to the testing of the oracles, from which day they set out from Sardis, counting the remaining time, and on the hundredth day, they were to consult the oracles, asking what the king of the Lydians, Croesus, the son of Alyattes, was doing at that time. Whatever each of the oracles prophesied, they were to write down and bring back to him. Now, what the other oracles prophesied is not mentioned by anyone, but in Delphi, as soon as the Lydians entered the temple to consult the god and asked the instructed question, the Pythian priestess spoke these lines in hexameter verse: "I know the number of the sand and the measures of the sea, and I understand the mute, and I hear the one who does not speak. A smell has come to my senses of a strong-shelled turtle being cooked in bronze along with the meat of lambs, where bronze is laid beneath, and bronze is laid above."
These things, having been prophesied by the Pythian priestess, the Lydians wrote down and went away, returning to Sardis. And when the other messengers who had been sent also arrived, bringing the oracles, Croesus, unfolding each of the writings, examined them. Indeed, he paid no attention to the others, but when he heard the one from Delphi, he immediately prayed and accepted it, believing that the only oracle was the one in Delphi, because it had found out what he himself had done. For after he had sent the envoys to the oracles, having guarded the main day, he devised such things: having thought of something that was impossible to find out and to explain, he himself cut up a turtle and a lamb together and boiled them in a bronze cauldron, placing a bronze lid on top.
Indeed, the answer from Delphi was given to Croesus in this way. As for the response from the oracle of Amphiaraus, I cannot say what it was that was given to the Lydians who had performed the customary rites around the temple (for this is not mentioned), but rather that Croesus also believed he had obtained a truthful oracle from this one.
After these things, Croesus sought to appease the god in Delphi with great sacrifices. For he sacrificed three thousand sacrificial animals, and he burned gold and silver-covered couches, golden cups, and purple garments and tunics, having made a great fire, hoping to win over the god more with these things. And he told all the Lydians to sacrifice, each one whatever they had. And when the sacrifice was done, having poured out an immense amount of gold, he drove out half-bricks from it, making the longer sides six palms, and the shorter sides three palms, and the height one palm. And the number of them was one hundred and seventeen, and of these, four were pure gold, each weighing two and a half talents, and the other half-bricks were of white gold, weighing two talents. And he also made a lion's image of pure gold, weighing ten talents. This lion, after the temple in Delphi was burned down, fell from the half-bricks (for it was set upon them), and now lies in the treasury of the Corinthians, weighing seven and a half talents; for a quarter of a talent was lost from it.
Having accomplished these things, Croesus sent them to Delphi, and along with them, these other things: two large bowls of great size, one gold and one silver, of which the gold one lay on the right as one entered the temple, and the silver one on the left. And these too were moved when the temple was burned down, and the gold one lies in the treasury of the Clazomenians, weighing eight and a half talents and twelve minae more, and the silver one at the corner of the forecourt of the temple, holding six hundred amphorae; for it is used by the Delphians for mixing at the Theophania. And the Delphians say that it is the work of Theodorus of Samos, and I think so too, for it does not seem to me to be a chance work. And he sent four silver casks, which stand in the treasury of the Corinthians, and he dedicated two sprinkling vessels, one gold and one silver, of which the gold one has an inscription that it is a gift of the Lacedaemonians, not speaking correctly; for this too is Croesus', and one of the Delphians inscribed it as a gift of the Lacedaemonians, wishing to do them a favor, whose name I know but will not mention. But the boy, through whose hand the water flows, is a gift of the Lacedaemonians, but neither of the sprinkling vessels is. Croesus sent many other offerings not worthy of mention along with these, and round silver basins, and indeed a golden statue of a woman three cubits high, which the Delphians say is an image of Croesus' baker. And Croesus dedicated his own wife's necklaces and belts as well.
These things he sent to Delphi, and to Amphiaraus, having learned of his valor and his fate, he dedicated a shield entirely of gold and a solid spear all of gold, the shaft being likewise of gold with the spearhead. Both of these were still lying in my time in Thebes, in the temple of Ismenian Apollo.
To those Lydians who were about to bring these gifts to the temples, Croesus gave orders to inquire of the oracles whether Croesus should march against the Persians and if he should add any army of men as allies. And when they arrived at the places to which they were sent, the Lydians dedicated the offerings and consulted the oracles, saying, "Croesus, king of the Lydians and other nations, believing these to be the only oracles among men, has given you gifts worthy of your discoveries, and now he asks you whether he should march against the Persians and if he should add any army of men as allies." They asked these things, and the opinions of both oracles ran together, saying to Croesus that if he should march against the Persians, he would destroy a great empire. And they advised him to find the strongest of the Greeks and make them his friends.
And when the oracles were brought back to Croesus, he was overjoyed by the responses, and fully hoping to destroy the kingdom of Cyrus, he sent again to Delphi, giving each of the Delphians two gold coins, having learned their number. In return for these, the Delphians gave Croesus and the Lydians priority in consulting the oracle, exemption from fees, the best seats at festivals, and the right for anyone who wished to become a Delphian for all time.
And having given gifts to the Delphians, Croesus consulted the oracle for the third time; for indeed, having received the truth of the oracle, he was eager to make use of it. And he inquired, asking the oracle if his reign would be long-lasting. The Pythian priestess responded to him with these words: "But when a mule becomes king of the Medes, then, Lydian with swift feet, flee by the stony banks of the Hermus River, and do not stay nor be ashamed to be a coward."
When Croesus heard these verses, he was very pleased, most of all, believing that a mule would never become king of the Medes instead of a man, and thus neither he nor his descendants would ever cease to rule. After this, he considered, seeking to find out which of the Greeks were the most powerful, so that he might acquire them as friends. And inquiring, he found that the Lacedaemonians and the Athenians were the most prominent, the former of the Doric race and the latter of the Ionic. For these were the most distinguished, being in ancient times the Pelasgian and the Hellenic nation. And the former never migrated anywhere, while the latter was very much a wandering race. For during the reign of King Deucalion, they inhabited the land of Phthia, and during the time of Dorus, son of Hellen, the region under Mount Ossa and Mount Olympus, which was called Histiaean. And from the Histiaean region, when they were driven out by the Cadmeans, they inhabited Mount Pindus, called Macedonian. And from there, they moved again to Dryopia, and from Dryopia, they came to the Peloponnese and were called Dorians.
What language the Pelasgians spoke, I cannot say precisely. But if it is necessary to conjecture, based on the Pelasgians who still exist above the Tyrrheni, inhabiting the city of Creston, who were once neighbors of those now called Dorians (and they inhabited that land which is now called Thessalian), and the Pelasgians who inhabited Placia and Scylace on the Hellespont, who became fellow citizens with the Athenians, and all the other Pelasgian settlements which changed their name: if we must conjecture based on these, the Pelasgians spoke a barbarian language. Therefore, if the whole Pelasgian nation was like this, the Attic people, being Pelasgian, changed their language together with their migration to the Hellenes. For indeed, neither are the Crestonians similar in language to any of those now living around them, nor are the Placians, but they are similar in language to each other, showing that they have preserved the character of the language they brought with them when they migrated to these regions.
The Hellenic people, as it seems to me, have always used the same language since they came into existence. However, being separated from the Pelasgian and weak, starting from a small beginning, it increased into a multitude of nations, especially as many Pelasgians and other barbarian nations joined it. Therefore, before this, it seems to me that the Pelasgian nation, being barbarian, did not increase greatly at any time.
Of these nations, then, the Attic, being both occupied and divided, Croesus learned was ruled by Pisistratus, the son of Hippocrates, at this time tyrant of the Athenians. For when Hippocrates was a private citizen and watching the Olympic games, a great portent occurred: after he had sacrificed, the pots standing full of meat and water boiled without fire and overflowed. Chilon, the Lacedaemonian, happening to be present and seeing the portent, advised Hippocrates first not to bring a wife capable of bearing children into his house, and if he happened to have one, to send her away, and if he happened to have a son, to disown him. Hippocrates, however, was not willing to be persuaded by Chilon's advice, and after this, Pisistratus was born to him, who, when the Athenians were divided into factions, the coastal led by Megacles, the son of Alcmaeon, and the plain by Lycurgus, the son of Aristolaides, despising the tyranny, raised a third faction. Gathering partisans and pretending to be on the side of the uplanders, he devised the following plan. Wounding himself and his mules, he drove his team into the marketplace as if he had escaped from his enemies, who, he said, had wished to kill him while driving into the country, and he asked the people for some protection. Having previously distinguished himself in the campaign against the Megarians, he captured Nisaea and accomplished other great deeds. The Athenian people, deceived, gave him these men from the citizens, who did not become Pisistratus's bodyguards but club-bearers, for they followed him behind, holding wooden clubs. These men, rising up together with Pisistratus, seized the Acropolis. There, indeed, Pisistratus ruled the Athenians, neither disturbing the existing honors nor changing the laws, but he governed the city according to the established constitution, ordering it well and fairly.
After not much time, the supporters of Megacles and Lycurgus, having the same intention, drove him out. Thus, Pisistratus first held Athens, and having not yet firmly established his tyranny, was expelled. Those who expelled Pisistratus again fell into factions against each other. Megacles, being hard-pressed by the faction, proclaimed to Pisistratus that if he wanted to have his daughter as a wife, he would give him the tyranny. When Pisistratus agreed to these terms, they devised a plan for his return, which, as I find, was by far the most foolish, since the Hellenic nation had long been separated from the barbarian and was more skillful and free from foolish simplicity, and yet these Athenians, who were said to be the first in wisdom among the Greeks, devised such a plan. In the deme of Paeania, there was a woman named Phya, who was three fingers short of four cubits in height and otherwise well-formed. They dressed this woman in full armor, placed her in a chariot, and prepared her to appear as dignified as possible. They drove her into the city, sending heralds ahead, who, arriving in the city, said the following: "O Athenians, receive Pisistratus with good will, for Athena herself, honoring him above all men, brings him to her own Acropolis." These men, indeed, went about saying this, and immediately the rumor reached the demes that Athena was bringing Pisistratus, and those in the city, believing the woman to be the goddess herself, prayed to the human and received Pisistratus.
Having regained the tyranny in the manner mentioned, Pisistratus, according to the agreement made with Megacles, married Megacles' daughter. However, since he had grown-up sons and it was said that the Alcmeonids were cursed, he did not want to have children with his new wife and had intercourse with her not according to custom. At first, the woman hid this, but later, whether she told her mother or her mother found out, the mother told her husband. Angered as he was, Megacles reconciled with the rival faction. When Pisistratus learned of the actions against him, he completely left the country and went to Eretria, where he consulted with his sons. With Hippieus' opinion prevailing to regain the tyranny, they began to raise contributions from the cities that owed them some favor. Many provided large sums of money, but the Thebans surpassed them in the giving of funds. Afterward, not to mention much time, everything was prepared for their return. Argive mercenaries arrived from the Peloponnese, and a man from Naxos, named Lygdamis, who had been banished, volunteered and provided the greatest eagerness, bringing both money and men.
Having set out from Eretria in the eleventh year, they arrived back, and first of Attica, they held Marathon. While they were encamped in this place, both the supporters from the city and others from the demes flowed in, for whom tyranny was more desirable than freedom. These indeed gathered together, but the Athenians from the city, while Pisistratus was raising funds and even after he held Marathon, had no concern. But when they learned that he was marching from Marathon towards the city, then they indeed went to help against him. Both these forces went in full strength against those who were coming down, and those around Pisistratus, as they set out from Marathon towards the city, arrived at the same time at the temple of Pallenian Athena, and they set their weapons opposite each other. In this place, using divine guidance, Amphilytus, the Acarnanian diviner, appeared to Pisistratus, who, approaching him, spoke the following in hexameter verse: "The cast is made, the net is spread, and the tunny-fish shall dart through the moonlit night."
As he prophesied these things to him, Pisistratus, having understood the oracle, said he would accept what was prophesied and led his army. The Athenians from the city were indeed turned towards breakfast at that time, and after breakfast, some of them were engaged in dice games, while others were sleeping. Those around Pisistratus, falling upon the Athenians, put them to flight. As these fled, Pisistratus devised the most clever plan there, so that the Athenians would not be brought together again and would be scattered: having mounted his sons on horses, he sent them ahead, and they, catching up with the fleeing ones, spoke the things commanded by Pisistratus, urging them to be brave and to go each to their own.
As the Athenians were persuaded, thus indeed Pisistratus, seizing Athens for the third time, established his tyranny with many allies and with the help of revenues, some from Athens itself and some from the Strymon River region. He also took the children of the remaining Athenians who had not immediately fled as hostages and placed them in Naxos (for Pisistratus had also subdued this island by war and entrusted it to Lygdamis), and in addition to these things, he purified the island of Delos according to the oracles. He purified it in this way: for as far as the view of the temple extended, from this whole area, having dug up the dead, he moved them to another part of Delos. And Pisistratus ruled over the Athenians, while some of the Athenians had fallen in battle, and others of them, along with the Alcmeonids, had fled from their homeland.
Now indeed, Croesus learned that the Athenians at that time were in such a state, while the Lacedaemonians had escaped from great troubles and were already superior in war to the Tegeans. For when Leon was king and Hegesicles in Sparta, the Lacedaemonians were successful in all other wars, but they alone were defeated by the Tegeans. And even before this, they were the worst governed of almost all the Greeks, both among themselves and inhospitable to foreigners; but they changed to good government in this way: Lycurgus, a respected man of the Spartans, having gone to Delphi to the oracle, as he entered the temple, immediately the Pythia spoke these things: "You come, O Lycurgus, to my rich temple, dear to Zeus and to all who hold the dwellings of Olympus. I wonder whether I should prophesy you as a god or a man. But I hope even more for a god, O Lycurgus." Now indeed, some say that in addition to these things, the Pythia revealed to him the now established order for the Spartans. But as the Lacedaemonians themselves say, Lycurgus, having been the guardian of Leobotes, his own nephew who was king of the Spartans, brought these things from Crete. For as soon as he became guardian, he changed all the laws and guarded these things so as not to transgress them. And after the things relating to war, Lycurgus established the sworn divisions, bands of thirty, and common meals, and in addition to these things, the ephors and the council of elders.
Thus indeed, having changed, they became well-governed, and with Lycurgus having died, they established a temple and greatly honored him. And in a good land and with a not small number of men, they immediately prospered and became wealthy, and indeed they no longer desired to live in peace, but having despised the Arcadians, they inquired at Delphi about the whole land of the Arcadians. And the Pythia responded to them with these things: "You ask me for Arcadia; you ask me for much; I will not give it to you. There are many acorn-eating men in Arcadia who will prevent you. But I do not begrudge you; I will give you Tegea to dance with stomping feet and to measure the beautiful plain with a rope." When the Lacedaemonians heard these things reported, they indeed kept away from the other Arcadians, but carrying chains, they campaigned against the Tegeans, trusting in a deceitful oracle, as if they would enslave the Tegeans. But having been defeated in the battle, as many of them as were captured were both wearing the chains they themselves had brought and measuring the plain of the Tegeans with a rope while working. And these chains, with which they had been bound, were still in my time hanging in Tegea around the temple of Athena Alea.
Indeed, during the earlier war, they continually struggled badly against the Tegeans, but during the time of Croesus and the reign of Anaxandrides and Ariston in Lacedaemon, the Spartans had already become superior in war, having become so in this manner. Since they always were defeated in war by the Tegeans, having sent ambassadors to Delphi, they asked which of the gods, having been appeased, they would become superior in war to the Tegeans. And the Pythia responded to them to bring the bones of Orestes, the son of Agamemnon. But when they were not able to find the tomb of Orestes, they sent again to the god, asking the place in which Orestes lay. And to these ambassadors asking these things, the Pythia said the following: "There is a certain place in Arcadia, Tegea, in a smooth plain, where two winds blow forcefully under strong necessity, and a sign lies upon a sign, and a grief lies upon a grief. There, the life-nurturing earth holds the son of Agamemnon; you, having brought him back, will be the helper of Tegea." And when the Lacedaemonians heard these things as well, they were no less distant from the discovery, searching for everything, until indeed Lichas, one of the so-called "doers of good deeds" of the Spartans, found it; and the doers of good deeds are of the citizens, always the oldest going out from the knights, each for five years. It is necessary for these men, in this year, as they go out from the knights, to be sent by the Spartans for the common good, not to slacken in different places.
Of these men, then, Lichas found it in Tegea, using both chance and wisdom. For at this time, there was a mixing with the Tegeans, and having come to a bronze workshop, he was watching iron being driven out, and he was in wonder, seeing the work being done. Having learned, the blacksmith said to him, stopping his work, "Indeed, stranger from Laconia, if you saw what I have seen, you would be very much in wonder, where now you happen to be so amazed by the work of the iron. For I, wanting to make a well in this courtyard, digging, came upon a seven-cubit coffin; and because of disbelief that men could ever become larger, I opened it and saw the corpse equal in length to the coffin. Having measured it, I closed it again." He indeed said to him what he had seen, but he, having considered the things being said, put together that this was Orestes according to the oracle, putting it together in this way: he found the two bellows of the blacksmith to be the winds, and the anvil and the hammer to be the blow and the counter-blow, and the iron being driven out to be the grief lying upon grief, guessing in some such way that iron is found for the evil of man. And having put these things together and having gone back to Sparta, he explained the whole matter to the Lacedaemonians. They, however, having pretended to accuse him of a crime, banished him. And having arrived in Tegea and explaining his misfortune to the blacksmith, he rented the courtyard from him, who was not giving it up. But in time, as he recognized him, he rented it, and having dug up the tomb and having collected the bones, he went away, carrying them to Sparta. And from this time, as they tried each other, the Lacedaemonians became much superior in war; and already for them, much of the Peloponnese was subdued.
So then, learning all these things, Croesus sent messengers to Sparta, carrying gifts and asking for an alliance, and instructing them to say what was necessary. And having come, they said, "Croesus, the king of the Lydians and other nations, has sent us, saying these things: 'O Lacedaemonians, having consulted the god, I should add the Greek as a friend; for I learn that you stand at the head of Greece. Therefore, according to the oracle, I call upon you, wishing to become a friend and ally without deceit and guile.'" Indeed, Croesus announced these things through the messengers, and the Lacedaemonians, having heard the oracle given to Croesus, were pleased with the arrival of the Lydians and made oaths concerning hospitality and alliance. For they had some benefits from Croesus that had happened earlier. For the Lacedaemonians, having sent to Sardis to buy gold, wanted to use it for the statue that now stands in the Laconian Thornax of Apollo. And Croesus, as they were buying, gave it to them as a gift.
So then, for these reasons, the Lacedaemonians accepted the alliance, and because he had chosen them as friends above all other Greeks. And they themselves were ready to announce this, and having done this, they brought a bronze mixing bowl, filled with animal figures on the outside around the rim, and with a capacity of three hundred amphorae, wanting to give a gift in return to Croesus. This mixing bowl did not reach Sardis for the following reasons, which are said to be contradictory: the Lacedaemonians say that when the mixing bowl was being brought to Sardis and was near Samos, the Samians, having sailed against them with long ships, took it away. But the Samians themselves say that when the Lacedaemonians who were bringing the mixing bowl were late, and they learned that Sardis and Croesus had been captured, they sold the mixing bowl in Samos, and private men, having bought it, dedicated it to the temple of Hera. Perhaps even those who were giving it away would say, having arrived in Sparta, that they were robbed by the Samians. Now, concerning the mixing bowl, it happened in this way.
Croesus, then, having misunderstood the oracle, was making preparations for an expedition into Cappadocia, hoping to overthrow Cyrus and the Persian power. But as Croesus was preparing to march against the Persians, one of the Lydians, considered wise and previously being so, and from this opinion having a very great name among the Lydians, advised Croesus as follows: his name was Sandanis. "O king, you are preparing to make war against such men, who wear leather sandals and the rest of their clothing is also leather, and they eat not what they desire but what they have, having a rough country. And they do not indulge in wine but drink water, and they do not have figs to eat, nor any other good thing. Now, if you conquer them, what will you take away from them, since they have nothing? And if you are defeated, consider how many good things you will lose; for having tasted our good things, they will cling to them and will not be driven away. I, indeed, now give thanks to the gods, who do not put it into the minds of the Persians to make war on the Lydians." Saying these things, he did not persuade Croesus. For the Persians, before they subdued the Lydians, had neither luxury nor any good thing.
The Cappadocians, called Syrians by the Greeks, were indeed under the rule of the Medes before the Persians, and then under Cyrus. For the border of both the Median and Lydian rule was the Halys River, which flows from the Armenian mountain through the Cilicians, and then having the Matieni on the right while flowing, and the Phrygians on the other side. And flowing past these and flowing upwards towards the north wind, it separates the Cappadocian Syrians from the Paphlagonians on the left. Thus, the Halys River almost entirely cuts off the lower part of Asia from the sea opposite Cyprus to the Euxine Sea. This is the narrowest part of this whole region: a journey of five days is required for an unburdened man to cross it.
Croesus was making war on Cappadocia for these reasons: both desiring to add the land to his own share and especially trusting the oracle, and wanting to avenge Astyages against Cyrus. For Astyages, the son of Cyaxares, being Croesus' brother-in-law and the king of the Medes, Cyrus, the son of Cambyses, having conquered, held him. Astyages had become Croesus' brother-in-law in this way. A group of nomadic Scythians, having rebelled, went out into the Median land. At this time, Cyaxares, the son of Phraortes, the son of Deioces, ruled the Medes. He at first treated these Scythians well, as they were suppliants: so much so that he entrusted them with teaching their language and the art of the bow to the boys. But when time had passed, and the Scythians always went hunting and always brought something, and once it happened that they caught nothing, Cyaxares, having returned, treated them very roughly with his hands (for he had, as it was reported, a very violent temper). The Scythians, having suffered these things from Cyaxares, as they were unworthy of themselves, plotted to kill one of the boys who were being taught among them, and having prepared him as they were accustomed to prepare the animals, they brought him to Cyaxares as if it were a hunt indeed, and having given him, they quickly went away to Alyattes, the son of Sadyattes, in Sardis. These things also happened. For both Cyaxares and the guests who were present tasted these meats, and the Scythians, having done these things, became suppliants of Alyattes.
After these things, for indeed Alyattes did not give up the Scythians when Cyaxares asked, there had arisen a war between the Lydians and the Medes for five years, in which sometimes indeed the Medes conquered the Lydians, and sometimes the Lydians conquered the Medes, and they even made a certain night battle. But the change of this day, Thales the Milesian had foretold to the Ionians that it would come to pass, setting this year as a limit in which indeed the change happened. And when the Lydians and the Medes saw the night come instead of the day, they ceased from the battle and were even more eager for both to make peace for themselves. And those who reconciled them were these: Syennesis the Cilician and Labynetus the Babylonian. These men were the ones who hastened to make the sworn agreement for them and made an exchange of marriages: for they recognized Alyattes to give his daughter Aryenis to Astyages, the child of Cyaxares. For without a strong necessity, strong agreements do not wish to remain. And these nations make sworn agreements like the Greeks, and in addition to these, when they cut their arms into the same color, they lick up each other's blood.
This Astyages, then, being the grandfather of Cyrus on his mother's side, having been conquered, was held by him for the reason which I will indicate in the following accounts. Croesus, blaming Cyrus, sent to the oracles whether he should march against the Persians, and indeed, when a deceitful oracle arrived, hoping that the oracle was for himself, he marched into the Persian territory. But when Croesus arrived at the Halys River, there, as I say, he led his army across the existing bridges, but as the majority of Greeks say, Thales the Milesian led them across. For when Croesus was at a loss as to how his army would cross the river (for indeed these bridges did not exist at that time), it is said that Thales, being present in the camp, made the river flow on the left hand of the army and on the right hand, and he made it in this way: beginning upstream from the camp, he dug a deep trench, leading it in a crescent shape, so that it would take the camp established on its back, and turning into this trench from the ancient channels, and again passing by the camp, it would flow into the ancient channels. So that when the river was quickly divided, it became fordable on both sides, and those who say this also say that the ancient channel was completely dried up. But I do not agree with this: for how then did they cross it on their return?
Croesus, then, having crossed with his army, arrived in Cappadocia at the place called Pteria (which is the strongest part of this country, lying mostly towards the city of Sinope on the Euxine Sea), and there he encamped, destroying the lots of the Syrians: and he took the city of the Pterians and enslaved it, and he took all its surrounding areas, and made the Syrians, who had done nothing wrong, homeless. Cyrus, however, having gathered his own army and having taken all those dwelling in between, opposed Croesus. Before setting out to drive his army, he sent heralds to the Ionians to try to make them revolt from Croesus. Now the Ionians did not obey. Cyrus, then, when he arrived and encamped opposite Croesus, there in the Pterian region, they tried each other's strength. And with a strong battle taking place and many on both sides falling, finally, neither side having won, they separated when night came. And both armies fought in this way.
Croesus, however, having found fault with the size of his own army (for his army that had engaged was much smaller than that of Cyrus), having found fault with this, as on the following day Cyrus did not attempt to attack, he drove back to Sardis, intending to call upon the Egyptians according to the oath (for he had made an alliance with Amasis, who was ruling Egypt, earlier than with the Lacedaemonians), and having sent for the Babylonians as well (for an alliance had been made with them too, and Labynetus was ruling the Babylonians at that time), and having promised the Lacedaemonians to be present at a fixed time, having gathered these and his own army, he intended to wait for the winter to pass, and at the same time as spring, to march against the Persians. And he, thinking these things, when he arrived at Sardis, sent heralds throughout the alliances, ordering them to gather at Sardis in the fifth month. And the army that was present and had fought against the Persians, which was his foreign force, he dismissed all of them and scattered them, never expecting that Cyrus, having fought so closely, would march against Sardis.
While Croesus was considering these things, the whole suburb was filled with snakes: and when they appeared, the horses, leaving their pastures, went to eat them. Seeing this, Croesus thought it was indeed a portent, and immediately sent diviners to the Telmessian interpreters. But when the diviners arrived and learned from the Telmessians what the portent meant to signify, they could not report it to Croesus: for before they could sail back to Sardis, Croesus had been captured. Nevertheless, the Telmessians had learned this: that a foreign army was expected to come against Croesus' land, and when it arrived, it would subdue the inhabitants, saying that the snake was the offspring of the earth, and the horse was both an enemy and a foreigner. Now the Telmessians interpreted these things for Croesus, who had already been captured, not knowing anything about what was happening in Sardis and to Croesus himself.
Cyrus, however, immediately after the battle that had taken place in Pteria, learning that Croesus, having driven him away, intended to disband his army, deliberating, found it to be a matter for him to march as quickly as possible against Sardis, before the Lydians could gather their strength for a second time. And when this seemed good to him, he acted quickly: for having led his army into Lydia, he himself had come as a messenger to Croesus. At this point, Croesus, having fallen into great perplexity, as things had turned out contrary to his expectation or as he himself had thought, nevertheless led the Lydians into battle. Now at that time, there was no nation in Asia either more courageous or more valiant than the Lydian. And their battle was on horseback, carrying long spears, and they themselves were skilled in riding horses.
When they came together in the plain, which is before the city of Sardis, being both large and flat (and through it flow rivers, among others the Hyllus, which join together into the greatest one, called the Hermus, which, flowing from the sacred mountain of Mother Dindymene, empties into the sea near the city of Phocaea), there Cyrus, seeing the Lydians arranging themselves for battle, fearing the cavalry, made the following plan at the suggestion of a Mede named Harpagus: he gathered all the camels that followed his army carrying food and baggage, removed their loads, and placed men on them, having them equipped like cavalrymen. Having prepared them, he ordered them to go ahead of the rest of the army against Croesus's cavalry, and commanded the infantry to follow the camels, with all the cavalry behind the infantry. He instructed them not to spare any other Lydians they encountered but not to kill Croesus himself, even if he resisted capture. He arranged the camels opposite the cavalry for this reason: a horse fears a camel and cannot endure either the sight of it or the smell. Therefore, he had devised this plan, so that Croesus's cavalry would be useless, which the Lydian indeed relied upon to be victorious. But when they joined in battle, as soon as the horses quickly smelled and saw the camels, they turned back, and Croesus's hope was destroyed. However, the Lydians were not cowards at that point, but as they learned what was happening, they dismounted from their horses and fought the Persians on foot. Over time, with many on both sides falling, the Lydians were turned back, and being driven into the wall, they were besieged by the Persians.
Thus, the city was under siege. Croesus, thinking that the siege would be for a long time, sent other messengers from the wall to the allies. For the earlier ones were sent to gather at Sardis in the fifth month, but these he sent to urgently ask for help, as Croesus was being besieged.
So then, he sent messages to the other allies and indeed to Lacedaemon. At this very time, the Spartans themselves had a conflict with the Argives concerning a region called Thyrea, for these Thyreae, being part of the Argive territory, were cut off and held by the Lacedaemonians. And the land up to Malea, to the west, belonged to the Argives, both the mainland and the island of Cythera and the rest of the islands. With the Argives helping their own cut-off territory, they came together in words so that three hundred of each would fight, and whichever side prevailed would have the region; but the bulk of the army was to withdraw to their own land and not stay while they fought, for this reason: so that the others, seeing their own side defeated, would not come to their aid. Having agreed on this, they withdrew, and the chosen men of both sides, having been left behind, fought. As they fought and became evenly matched, three out of six hundred men were left behind: Alcenor and Chromios of the Argives, and Othryades of the Lacedaemonians; they were left behind as night came on. The two Argives, as if they had been victorious, ran to Argos, but Othryades, the Lacedaemonian, having stripped the Argive dead and brought their weapons to his own camp, kept himself in position. On the second day, both sides came to learn the outcome. For a while, each side claimed to be victorious, the Argives saying that more of their men had survived, the Lacedaemonians saying that the others had fled, while their own man had remained and stripped the enemy dead. Finally, from the dispute, they fell into battle, and with many on both sides falling, the Lacedaemonians were victorious. The Argives, from that time, having their heads shaved, which they had been compelled to wear long before, made a law and a curse that no Argive would grow his hair, nor would their women wear gold, until they recovered Thyreae. The Lacedaemonians, on the other hand, made a law opposite to this: for not wearing their hair long before, from that time they wore it long. They say that Othryades, the one left of the three hundred, ashamed to return to Sparta with his comrades destroyed, killed himself in Thyreae.
Such matters were happening among the Spartans when the messenger from Sardis came, asking for help for besieged Croesus. They, however, after learning from the messenger, were eager to help. And when they were already prepared and had ships ready, another message came, saying that the wall of the Lydians had been captured and Croesus had been taken alive. Thus, indeed, the Spartans, having experienced great misfortune, stopped.
Sardis was captured in this way. When the fourteenth day came for besieged Croesus, Cyrus sent horsemen through his army, promising to give gifts to the first one to climb the wall. After this, the army tried but did not advance. Then, with the others having stopped, a Mardian man tried to climb, whose name was Hyroeades, at this part of the acropolis where no guard had been stationed: for it was not terrible that it would not be captured at this point. For indeed, the acropolis is steep here and unassailable: it is turned towards Mount Tmolus of the city. This Hyroeades, the Mardian, having seen on the previous day one of the Lydians going down this part of the acropolis for a helmet that had rolled down from above and having picked it up, noticed and conceived in his mind: then indeed he himself had climbed up and other Persians climbed up after him. With many having climbed up, thus indeed Sardis was captured and the whole city was being plundered.
Regarding Croesus himself, these things happened. He had a son, of whom I mentioned earlier, in other respects excellent, but mute. So, in the past prosperity, Croesus had done everything for him, both inquiring about other things, and indeed he had sent to Delphi to consult about him. The Pythia said these things to him: "Lydian man, king of many, greatly foolish Croesus, do not desire to hear the much-prayed-for voice throughout the palace of your son speaking. For it is much better for you to remain around: for he will speak on the first day of misfortune." Indeed, with the wall being captured, for one of the Persians was going, having recognized Croesus as if to kill him, Croesus, now seeing him coming, due to the present misfortune, had neglected, and it did not matter to him to die being struck. But this mute son, as he saw the Persian coming, broke his voice due to fear and distress, and said, "Man, do not kill Croesus." Indeed, this one first spoke this, and after this, he already spoke for the whole time of his life.
The Persians indeed captured Sardis and took Croesus himself as a prisoner, having ruled for fourteen years and having been besieged for fourteen days, and according to the oracle, he put an end to his own great rule. Having taken him, the Persians brought him to Cyrus. He, having gathered a great fire, led Croesus upon it, bound in chains, and twice seven Lydian sons beside him, intending either indeed to dedicate these first-fruits to some god, or also wanting to fulfill a vow, or also wanting to find out if Croesus was god-fearing for this reason, he led him upon the pyre, wishing to know if any divine power would save him from being burned alive. Indeed, he did these things: and for Croesus, standing upon the pyre, although being in such great misfortune, the saying of Solon came to him as if it had been spoken by a god, that no one of the living is fortunate. When indeed this stood before him, having borne it and having sighed deeply from much silence, he called Solon three times. And Cyrus, having heard, ordered the interpreters to inquire who this one was that Croesus called upon, and the interpreters approached and asked. Croesus, however, kept silent for a while when asked, but after that, as he was compelled, he said, "This one, whom I would have greatly preferred for all tyrants to come to words with." As he explained to them the unknown, they again asked about the things being said. And as they persisted and caused trouble, he said indeed that Solon, being an Athenian, had come and, having seen all his own prosperity, had belittled it, saying such things as he had said, how everything had turned out for him just as that one had said, speaking not so much about himself as about the whole human condition and especially those who seemed to be fortunate among themselves. Croesus indeed was led away by these things, but the fire, already having been kindled, was burning the outer parts. And Cyrus, having heard the interpreters' words of what Croesus had said, having changed his mind and having considered that he himself was a man and was giving another man, who had been no less fortunate than himself, to the fire to be burned alive, and fearing retribution and having considered that there is nothing among humans that is secure, ordered to extinguish as quickly as possible the burning fire and to lead down both Croesus and those with Croesus. And those trying were no longer able to prevail over the fire.
At this point, it is said by the Lydians that Croesus, having learned of Cyrus' change of heart, as everyone was trying to extinguish the fire but could no longer control it, called upon Apollo, asking if any pleasing gift had been granted to him from the god, to come and save him from the present misfortune. While he was crying and calling upon the god, suddenly, from a clear and windless sky, clouds gathered and a storm broke out, and heavy rain poured down, extinguishing the pyre. Thus, Cyrus learned that Croesus was indeed god-favored and a good man, and having led him down from the pyre, he asked these things: "Croesus, who among men recognized you to wage war upon my land and to stand against me as an enemy instead of a friend?" And he said, "O King, I did these things due to your good fortune and my own misfortune, and the god of the Greeks, having raised me up, became the cause of these things for me to wage war. For no one is so senseless as to choose war before peace: for in the one, sons bury their fathers, and in the other, fathers bury their sons. But it was pleasing to the divine powers for these things to happen this way."
Having said these things, Cyrus indeed released him and let him sit nearby, and held him in great care, and both he himself and all those around him were amazed, seeing him. But he, being occupied with his thoughts, was silent. Afterward, having turned and seen the Persians busily plundering the city of the Lydians, he said, "O King, do I happen to speak to you about what I am thinking, or should I be silent in the present situation?" And Cyrus ordered him to be confident and to speak whatever he wished. And he asked him, saying, "What is this great crowd doing these things with such eagerness?" And he said, "They are plundering your city and dividing your possessions." But Croesus responded, "Neither my city nor my possessions are they plundering, for I no longer have a share in these things. Rather, they are carrying and taking away your possessions."
Cyrus indeed took care of what Croesus said, and having removed the others, he asked Croesus what he saw wrong in the things being done. And he said, "Since the gods have given me as a slave to you, I think it is right, if I see something more, to indicate it to you. The Persians, being by nature arrogant, are poor. Therefore, if you overlook these men plundering and seizing great wealth, expect these things to happen to them: whoever among them seizes the most, expect that this one will rise up against you. Now then, do this, if what I say pleases you: place guards of your bodyguards at all the gates, who, taking away the possessions from those who are carrying them out, say that it is necessary for them to give a tenth to Zeus. And you will not be hated by them, forcibly taking away the possessions, and they, understanding that you are doing just things, will willingly give them up."
Hearing these things, Cyrus was greatly delighted, as he thought the advice was well given. And having praised him greatly, and having instructed his bodyguards to carry out what Croesus had suggested, he said to Croesus these things: "Croesus, having suspended you, a king, you do good deeds and speak good words. Ask for a gift, whatever you wish to have immediately." And he said, "O master, if you let me, I will most gladly send these chains to the god of the Greeks, whom I honored most of the gods, to try and ask if it is his law to deceive those who do good." And Cyrus asked him why he requested this. Croesus then recounted to him his entire plan and the responses of the oracles and especially the offerings, and how, having been lifted up by the oracle, he had waged war against the Persians. And saying these things, he again requested to be allowed to reproach the god for this. And Cyrus, laughing, said, "You will obtain this from me, Croesus, and every other thing that you may need at any time." And when Croesus heard these things, he sent the Lydians to Delphi and instructed them to place the chains on the temple's threshold and to ask if the god was not ashamed of having persuaded Croesus to wage war against the Persians as if he would put an end to the power of Cyrus, from which such first fruits had come to him, showing the chains. And they were to ask these things, and if it is the law for the Greek gods to be ungrateful.
When the Lydians arrived and spoke the things they had been instructed, the Pythia is said to have said these things: "It is impossible to escape the destined fate, even for a god. Croesus, however, fulfilled the sin of his fifth ancestor, who, being a bodyguard of the Heraclidae, killed his master by a woman's deceit and took his position, which was not at all appropriate for him. And as Loxias eagerly tried to make the disaster of the Sardians happen to the children of Croesus and not to Croesus himself, it was not possible to lead the Fates astray. But as far as these allowed, he both accomplished and granted him a favor: for he postponed the capture of Sardis for three years, and Croesus should know that he was captured later than he was destined. And secondly, Loxias saved him from being burned. But Croesus wrongly blames the oracle for what happened. For Loxias foretold him that if he waged war against the Persians, he would destroy a great empire. He should have carefully considered and asked whether the oracle meant his own or Cyrus' empire. But not understanding the spoken word nor asking again, let him declare himself guilty. And when he consulted the oracle for the last time, Loxias told him about the mule, but he did not understand this either. For this Cyrus was indeed a mule: for he was born of two parents who were not of the same nation, his mother being superior and his father inferior. For she was a Mede and the daughter of King Astyages of the Medes, while he was a Persian and, being subject to them, lived with his wife, who was superior to him in all respects." These things the Pythia answered to the Lydians, who then carried them back to Sardis and reported them to Croesus. And when he heard them, he recognized that the fault was his own and not the god's. Thus, indeed, the reign of Croesus and the first downfall of Ionia took place in this way.
Croesus indeed has many other offerings in Greece, not only the ones mentioned. For in Thebes of Boeotia, there is a golden tripod dedicated to Apollo of Ismenus, and in Ephesus, there are the golden oxen and many of the pillars, and in the temple of Proneia in Delphi, there is a large golden shield. These things were still remaining even in my time, but some of the offerings had been destroyed. The offerings of Croesus in Branchidae of the Milesians, as I learn, were equal in weight and similar to those in Delphi. Now, the offerings he made both to Delphi and to the shrine of Amphiaraus were from his personal property and the first fruits of his paternal wealth. The other offerings, however, came from the property of a man who was his enemy, who, before he became king, stood in opposition to him, trying to make Pantaleon the ruler of the Lydians. And Pantaleon was the son of Alyattes, and Croesus' brother, not of the same mother; for Croesus was born from a Carian woman, and Pantaleon from an Ionian. And when Croesus, having been given the rule by his father, prevailed, he destroyed the man who opposed him by dragging him across a carding-comb, and having seized his property earlier, he then dedicated it in the manner mentioned to the places mentioned. And let this much be said about the offerings.
In Lydia, there are not many wonders for writing, such as in other countries, except for the gold dust that comes from Mount Tmolus. But there is one great work, apart from the works of the Egyptians and the Babylonians: there is the tomb of Alyattes, the father of Croesus, which has a base of large stones and the rest of the tomb is made of earth. It was built by the market workers, the craftsmen, and the working slave girls. There were still five cornerstones on top of the tomb in my time, and inscriptions were carved on them, showing the work done by each group, and the work of the slave girls appeared to be the greatest. For all the daughters of the common people of the Lydians practice prostitution, collecting dowries for themselves until they marry, doing this. And they offer themselves. The circumference of the tomb is six stadia and two plethra, and the width is three stadia and thirteen plethra. There is a large lake near the tomb, which the Lydians say is ever-flowing; and it is called Gygaean. So, this is such a thing.
The Lydians, indeed, use customs similar to the Greeks, except that they prostitute their female children. They were the first of the people whom we know to use coined money of gold and silver, and they were also the first to become shopkeepers. The Lydians themselves say that the games now played by them and the Greeks were invented among them. And they say that these games were invented at the time when they colonized Tyrrhenia, speaking as follows. During the reign of Atys, the son of Manes, a great scarcity of food occurred throughout all Lydia. For a while, the Lydians endured, but as it did not cease, they sought remedies, and each of them invented something. Then, indeed, they invented the dice, the knuckle-bones, the ball, and all the other kinds of games, except for the dice, which the Lydians do not claim to have invented. Having invented these games, they played them to deal with the famine, playing all day on alternate days so that they would not have to search for food, and on the other days, they would stop playing and eat. They lived this way for eighteen years. But when the evil did not cease but rather grew stronger, their king divided the Lydians into two parts, and he had them draw lots, one part to stay in the country, and the other part to leave the land, and he himself would command the part that would stay, and his son would command the part that would leave. And when the lots were drawn, those who were to leave the country went down to Smyrna and built ships, and they loaded all their goods that could be transported, and they sailed away in search of a livelihood and land, and they passed by many nations and arrived at the Ombrici, where they founded cities and have lived until now. And instead of being called Lydians, they changed their name to Tyrrhenians, after the king's son who led them there. The Lydians, indeed, were enslaved by the Persians.
Now, indeed, our account seeks to investigate from this point who Cyrus was, the one who took the rule of Croesus, and by what manner the Persians came to rule Asia. As the Persians who do not wish to glorify the story of Cyrus but to tell the story as it was say, I will write according to these things, knowing that there are also three other ways of telling the story of Cyrus. When the Assyrians ruled Upper Asia for five hundred and twenty years, the Medes were the first to revolt from them. And somehow, these Medes, fighting for their freedom against the Assyrians, became brave men, and having repelled slavery, they were freed. After them, the other nations also did the same as the Medes.
Now, while all on the mainland were autonomous, they again fell into tyranny in this way. There was a wise man among the Medes, whose name was Deioces, the son of Phraortes. This Deioces, desiring to become a ruler, did the following. While the Medes lived in villages, he was in his own village, already esteemed and even more eagerly applying himself to justice, doing this while there was much lawlessness throughout all of Media, knowing that justice is the enemy of injustice. The Medes of the same village, seeing his ways, chose him as their judge. And he, indeed, remembering his desire for rule, was straight and just, and by doing this, he had no small praise from his fellow citizens, so that when the people in the other villages heard that Deioces was the only man judging rightly, they were glad, and they went to Deioces themselves to have their cases judged, and in the end, they turned to no one else.
But as the number of those coming to him always increased, as they learned that the judgments turned out according to what was right, Deioces, knowing that everything depended on himself, no longer wished to sit where he had previously sat and judged, nor did he say that he would give judgment any longer. For it was not profitable for him, having neglected his own affairs, to judge for his neighbors throughout the day. So, with robbery and lawlessness being even much more in the villages than it was before, the Medes gathered together in the same place and gave an account to themselves, speaking about the things that had happened. And as I think, Deioces' friends especially said, "For we are not able to live in the present manner in the land; let us set up a king for ourselves, and thus the land will be well-governed, and we ourselves will turn to our work, and we will not be made unsettled by lawlessness." Saying these things, they persuaded themselves to be ruled by a king.
Immediately, when they put forth the question of whom they would make king, Deioces was greatly recommended by every man and put forth and praised, to the point that they agreed for him to be their king. And he ordered them to build a house for himself worthy of the kingship and to entrust him with bodyguards. So, the Medes did these things. For they built a large and strong house for him, where he himself pointed out in the land, and they allowed him to choose bodyguards from all the Medes. And when he had obtained the rule, he compelled the Medes to build one city and to care for this more than the others. And when the Medes agreed to this as well, he built large and strong walls, which are now called Ecbatana, one circle within another. And this wall was so contrived that the other circle was higher than the other by the height of the battlements alone. Indeed, the place itself, being a hill, contributed to this, but it was also more skillfully contrived. And there were seven circles in total, and in the last one, the royal palace and the treasuries are situated. The largest of them is the wall, especially in size, like the circle of the Athenians. The battlements of the first circle are white, of the second black, of the third purple, of the fourth blue, and of the fifth orange. Thus, the battlements of the five circles are adorned with colors. The last two are silver-coated and gold-coated, having the battlements.
Indeed, Deioces built these walls for himself and around his own house, and he ordered the rest of the people to live around the wall. And when everything was built, Deioces was the first to establish this order: that no one should enter the presence of the king, but to use messengers for everything, and that the king should not be seen by anyone. Moreover, it was considered disgraceful to laugh or spit in front of him. He established these things around himself for these reasons: so that his peers, who were his companions and not of a lesser household nor lacking in manly virtue, would not be grieved and plot against him when they saw him, but rather, by not seeing him, they would think he was different from them.
And after he had arranged these things and strengthened himself in his tyranny, he was strict in guarding justice. And they would write down the cases and send them to him, and he, judging the cases brought to him, would send them back. He did these things concerning the cases, and he had arranged these other things: if he found out that someone was acting violently, he would summon that person and punish them according to the worth of each offense. And there were spies and eavesdroppers throughout the entire land he ruled.
Now, Deioces alone gathered together the Median nation and ruled over it. And there are these tribes of the Medes: Busae, Paretaceni, Struchates, Arizanti, Budii, and Magi. Indeed, there are these tribes of the Medes.
Phraortes, the son of Deioces, came to be, and when Deioces died, having ruled for fifty-three years, he took over the rule. And taking over, he was not content to rule only the Medes, but having campaigned against the Persians, he first imposed himself on them and made them the first subjects of the Medes. And then, having these two nations, both strong, he turned to conquer Asia, going from one nation to another. And having campaigned against the Assyrians and the Assyrians, those who held Ninus and ruled over all before, but then were isolated from allies as they had revolted, yet otherwise were in good condition, Phraortes campaigned against them and was destroyed himself, having ruled for twenty-two years, and his great army.
When Phraortes died, Cyaxares, the son of Phraortes and Deioces, took over. This one is said to have become much more valiant than his ancestors, and he was the first to organize the troops in Asia according to their roles, and the first to order each to be separate, both the spearmen and the archers and the horsemen; before that, everything was mixed together in the same way. This is the one who fought with the Lydians when night became day for them as they fought, and the one who brought all of Asia above the Halys River under himself. And having gathered all those ruled by him, he campaigned against Ninus, both avenging his father and wanting to destroy this city. And when he had engaged and defeated the Assyrians, a great army of Scythians came upon him as he was besieging Ninus, and the king of the Scythians, Madyes, son of Protothyes, led them. They had invaded Asia, driving the Cimmerians out of Europe, and following these fleeing ones, they arrived in the Median land in this way.
There is a road from the Maeetian Lake to the Phasis River and to the Colchi, a thirty-day journey for a light traveler, and from the Colchis, it is not much to cross over into the Median land, but there is one nation in between them, the Saspires, and passing by this, one would be in the Median land. However, the Scythians did not invade this way, but they turned to the longer road below, having the Caucasian mountains on their right. In this place, the Medes, having engaged with the Scythians and having been defeated in the battle, lost their rule. And the Scythians held all of Asia.
From there, they went towards Egypt. And when they came to Palestine of Syria, Psammetichus, the king of Egypt, met them and turned them away from going further with gifts and entreaties. And when they were retreating back from Syria and were in the city of Ascalon, some of the Scythians passed by without causing harm, but a few of them who were left behind plundered the temple of Heavenly Aphrodite. This temple, as I find out by inquiring, is the oldest of all the temples of this goddess; for the temple in Cyprus came from here, as the Cyprians themselves say, and the one in Cythera was founded by Phoenicians who were from this Syria. To those Scythians who plundered the temple in Ascalon and to their descendants, the god inflicted a female disease. So, the Scythians say that they suffer from this disease for this reason, and one can see among themselves those who come to the Scythian land how they are afflicted, those whom the Scythians call Enarees.
For twenty-eight years then, the Scythians ruled Asia, and everything was in disorder for them due to their violence and contempt. For they exacted tribute separately from each, imposing it on each one, and apart from the tribute, they plundered as they roamed around, taking whatever each had. And of these, Cyaxares and the Medes, having entertained and made drunk the greater part of them, killed them, and thus the Medes recovered their rule and gained power over those whom they had before, and they captured Ninus (how they captured it, I will show in other accounts) and made the Assyrians subject to them, except for the Babylonian portion.
After these things, Cyaxares, having ruled for forty years, including the time when the Scythians ruled, died, and Astyages, the son of Cyaxares, took over the kingdom. And he had a daughter, to whom he gave the name Mandane. Astyages dreamed that she urinated so much that it filled his own city and flooded all of Asia. Having consulted the Magi who interpreted dreams, he was frightened, learning each detail from them. After this Mandane, already of marriageable age, he did not give as a wife to any of the Medes worthy of her, fearing the vision. But he gave her to a Persian, whose name was Cambyses, whom he found to be of a good house and of a quiet nature, considering him far below an average Mede man.
When Mandane was living with Cambyses, in the first year, Astyages saw another vision, and it seemed to him that a vine grew from the genitals of this daughter, and the vine covered all of Asia. Having seen this and consulted the dream interpreters, he sent for his daughter from the Persians, who was pregnant, and when she arrived, he guarded her, wanting to destroy the child born from her. For the Magi dream interpreters had indicated to him that the offspring of his daughter would rule instead of him. So, Astyages, guarding these things, when Cyrus was born, called Harpagus, a man of his household and the most trustworthy of the Medes and the manager of all his affairs, and said to him these things: "Harpagus, do not fail in the matter I put before you, nor betray me and choose others, so that you yourself may not fall into trouble later. Take the child Mandane bore, and bring him to your own home and kill him, and then bury him in whatever way you wish." And he replied, "O king, you have never seen anything displeasing from this man before, and we will guard ourselves for you and for the time to come, not to err in anything. But if it is your wish for this to happen, it is necessary for my part to serve diligently."
Having responded to these things, Harpagus, as the child was handed over to him, marked for death, went to his home weeping. And arriving, he told his wife the whole speech of Astyages. And she said to him, "Now then, what is in your mind to do?" And he replied, "Not as Astyages ordered, nor if he becomes more irrational and mad than he is now, will I add to his plan, nor will I serve in such a murder. For many reasons, I will not kill him, both because the child is related to me, and because Astyages is old and childless of male offspring. If, after his death, the tyranny should pass to this daughter, whose son he now kills through me, what else remains for me but the greatest danger hereafter? But for my own safety, it is necessary for this child to die, yet it is necessary for one of Astyages' own people to become the murderer, and not one of mine."
Having said these things, Harpagus immediately sent a messenger to one of Astyages' cowherds, whom he knew to be grazing his herds most skillfully in the wildest mountains. This man's name was Mitradates, and he lived with a fellow slave, whose name was Cyno in the Greek language, but in the Median language, Spaco; for the Medes call a dog spaca. The foothills of the mountains, where this cowherd had the pastures of the cattle, were towards the north wind of Ecbatana and towards the Euxine Sea. For in this direction, the Median land is very mountainous, high, and covered with forests, while the rest of the Median land is all flat. So when the cowherd, being urgently summoned, arrived, Harpagus said these things: "Astyages orders you, taking this child, to place it in the most desolate of the mountains, so that it may be destroyed as quickly as possible. And he ordered me to say these things to you, that if you do not kill it but save it in your own way, he will use the worst destruction against you. And I have been ordered to oversee the child being left."
Hearing these things, the cowherd took the child and went the same way back and arrived at his dwelling. And his wife, being close to giving birth all day, happened to give birth by some divine chance while the cowherd was away in the city. Both were worried about each other, he fearing for his wife's childbirth, and the wife wondering why Harpagus had urgently summoned her husband. But when he returned and stood before her, the wife, seeing something unexpected, asked first what had made Harpagus so eagerly summon him. And he said, "Wife, having gone to the city, I saw and heard things I wish I had neither seen nor ever happened to our masters. The whole house of Harpagus was filled with weeping, and I, astonished, went inside. As soon as I entered, I saw a child lying there, gasping and crying, adorned with gold and colorful clothing. Harpagus, when he saw me, ordered me to quickly take the child and go, and to place it where the wildest of the mountains would be, saying that Astyages was the one who imposed these things on me, threatening many things if I did not do them. And I, taking the child, carried it, thinking it was one of the servants', for I would never have believed it was from where it was. I was amazed, seeing it adorned with gold and clothes, and also the weeping clearly established in Harpagus'. And indeed, on the way, I learned the whole story from the servant who was sending me out of the city and handed over the baby to me, that it was the child of Mandane, Astyages' daughter, and of Cambyses, the son of Cyrus, and that Astyages ordered it to be killed. And now, here it is."
As the cowherd spoke these things, he uncovered and showed the child. And when the woman saw the child, being both large and beautiful, she cried and, taking hold of her husband's knees, begged him not to expose the child in any way. But he said that he was not able to do otherwise: for spies from Harpagus would be visiting, and he would be destroyed in the worst way if he did not do these things. But since she could not persuade her husband, the woman then said these things: "Since, then, I cannot persuade you not to expose the child, do this, if indeed it is necessary for the child to be seen exposed. For I have also given birth, and I have given birth to a dead child. Bring this one and expose it, and let us raise the child of Astyages' daughter as if it were our own. And in this way, neither will you be caught wronging our masters, nor will it be badly planned for us: for the dead one will obtain a royal burial, and the living one will not lose its life."
Thinking that his wife spoke well for the present situation, the cowherd immediately did these things: he brought the child he was supposed to kill, handed it to his own wife, and took his own dead child and placed it in the chest in which he had carried the other one. Having adorned it with all the adornments of the other child, he carried it to the most desolate part of the mountains and placed it there. When it was the third day for the child being exposed, the cowherd went to the city, leaving one of his herdsmen to watch over it, and upon arriving at Harpagus' house, he said he was ready to show the corpse of the child. Harpagus then sent his most trusted bodyguards, and through them, he saw and buried the cowherd's child. And the one that was buried was the cowherd's child, while the woman of the cowherd took and raised the one who would later be called Cyrus, giving him another name, not Cyrus.
And when the child was ten years old, an event of this kind happened to him, revealing him. He was playing in this village where these cowherds were, and he played with other children of his age in the road. And the children playing chose this one, the child called the son of the cowherd, to be their king. And he ordered some of them to build houses, others to be bodyguards, and one of them to be the eye of the king, and he gave the task of bringing messages to another, assigning each one a task. Now one of these children playing, being the son of Artembares, a distinguished man among the Medes, did not do what was ordered by Cyrus. Cyrus ordered the other children to seize him, and when the children obeyed, Cyrus quickly bound the child very tightly with whips. And when he was released as quickly as possible, feeling that he had suffered things unworthy of himself, he was more indignant, and going down to the city, he complained to his father about the things he had encountered under Cyrus, not saying Cyrus (for this was not yet his name), but referring to the son of Astyages' cowherd. And Artembares, being angry as he was, went to Astyages and, at the same time, brought his child, saying that he had suffered outrageous things, saying, "O King, we have been insulted by your slave, the son of the cowherd of Astyages," showing the shoulders of the child.
Hearing and seeing this, Astyages, wanting to take revenge on the child for the sake of Artembares' honor, sent for both the cowherd and the child. And when both were present, Astyages, looking at Cyrus, said, "You, being the child of such a man, dared to bind this one, the child of my foremost man, with such disgrace?" And he answered thus, "O master, I did these things to him justly. For the children from the village, of whom he was one, playing, set me up as their king, for they thought I was the most suitable for this. Now the other children were doing the tasks assigned, but this one was disobedient and had no regard, so he received the punishment. Therefore, if I am worthy of harm for this, here I am."
As the child spoke, Astyages was struck by a recognition of him, and both the character of his face seemed to resemble his own, and his manner of speaking was more free. And the time of the exposure seemed to coincide with the child's age. Being amazed by these things, he was speechless for a while. But at last, having recovered, he said, wanting to send Artembares away so that he might take the cowherd alone and interrogate him, "Artembares, I will do these things so that neither you nor your child will have any complaint." So he sent Artembares away, and the attendants led Cyrus inside at the command of Astyages. And when the cowherd was left alone, Astyages asked him where he got the child and who gave him. And he said that he was his own and that the mother who bore him was still with him. But Astyages said that he was not well-advised, desiring to come to great necessities, and while saying these things, he signaled to the guards to seize him. And as he was being led to the necessities, he then revealed the truth: beginning from the beginning, he went through it, using the truth, and he came down to entreaties and asking for pardon for himself.
Astyages, when the cowherd had revealed the truth, was already making less of him, but being greatly angry with Harpagus, he ordered him to call his guards. And when Harpagus was present, Astyages asked him, "Harpagus, by what kind of death did you use the child, whom I gave to you, born from my daughter?" And Harpagus, seeing the cowherd inside, did not turn to a false way, so that he would not be caught being refuted, but said these things: "O king, since I received the child, I was planning, considering how I would do according to your mind, and I, becoming blameless towards you, would not be the murderer of either your daughter or you yourself. So I do this: calling this cowherd, I give the child, saying that you are the one ordering to kill him. And saying this, I did not lie: for you were commanding so. However, I give him with these instructions, to put him on a deserted mountain and to watch, staying nearby until he dies, having threatened him with all sorts of things if he does not accomplish these things. And when this one had done the things ordered, the child died, and I sent the most trusted eunuchs and saw through them, and I buried him. Thus, O king, it happened concerning this matter, and the child met such a death."
Harpagus indeed showed the straight story: but Astyages, hiding the anger he held within him because of what had happened, first, according to what he himself had heard from the cowherd, recounted the matter to Harpagus, and then, as it was being discussed again, he went on saying that the child was alive and that the event had turned out well: "For the thing that has been done," he said, speaking, "to this child, I was greatly troubled, and being at odds with my daughter, I was not taking it lightly. So, since fortune has turned out well, send this son of yours to the newly returned child, and be present with me at dinner (for I am going to sacrifice for the child's safety, and this honor is added to the gods)."
Harpagus, when he heard these things, prostrated himself and made much of the fact that his error had turned out well and that he had been invited to a dinner with good fortune, and he went to his house. Having entered quickly, for he had one son, about thirteen years old, he sent him, ordering him to go to Astyages and to do whatever he might command, and he himself, being very happy, told his wife the things that had happened. Astyages, however, when the son of Harpagus arrived, slaughtered him and, dividing him limb by limb, roasted some of the flesh and boiled the rest, and having prepared it well, he held it ready. Then, when the time of the dinner came and the other guests were present, as well as Harpagus, tables full of sheep's meat were set before the others and Astyages himself, but for Harpagus, all the other parts of his son, except for the head and the tips of the hands and feet, were set before him; these things, however, lay separately, covered in a basket. And when Harpagus seemed to have enough of the food, Astyages asked him if he had enjoyed the feast. And Harpagus said that he both knew and found everything the king did to be pleasing. With these words exchanged, and taking the remaining flesh, he went to his house, and from there, as I think, he intended to gather everything and bury it.
Astyages imposed this punishment on Harpagus, and concerning Cyrus, he called the same Magi who had interpreted the dream for him in this way. When they arrived, Astyages asked them about their interpretation. They said the same thing, saying that the child must become king if he survived and did not die earlier. Astyages then replied to them with these words: "The child is alive and well, and the village boys made him king while they were playing in the countryside. He performed all the things that kings do in truth, having appointed bodyguards, doorkeepers, and messengers, and he ruled. And now, what do you think this will lead to?" The Magi said, "If the child is alive and has become king without any premeditation, then be confident about this and have a good spirit: for he will not rule a second time. For some of our prophecies have come to pass in small matters, and the fulfillment of dreams comes to a weak end." Astyages replied with these words: "I myself, Magi, am of the same opinion, that since the child was called king, the dream has been fulfilled, and there is no further danger for me from this child. Nevertheless, consider carefully and advise me what will be the safest for my house and for you." The Magi said in response to this, "O King, it is of great importance to us that your rule is set right. For if the power goes to this child, being a Persian, we, being Medes, will be enslaved and become of no account in the eyes of the Persians, as we are foreigners. But with you as king, being a fellow citizen, we both rule a part and have great honors from you. So, in every way, we must look out for you and your rule. And now, if we saw anything fearful, we would tell you everything. But since the dream has come to a weak end, we ourselves are confident and advise you to think of other things. As for this child, send him away from your sight to the Persians and to those who gave birth to him."
Hearing these things, Astyages was glad and, calling Cyrus, said to him these words: "O child, I indeed treated you unjustly because of an incomplete dream, but you have survived by your own fate. Now then, go to the Persians rejoicing, and I will send guides along with you. And when you arrive there, you will find a father and mother, not like Mitradates the cowherd and his wife."
Having said these things, Astyages sent Cyrus away. When he returned to the house of Cambyses, his parents received him, and having received him, they asked him in what manner he had survived, as they had just learned then that he had not died. He told them that before, he did not know but had been greatly mistaken, but on the journey, he had learned all of his own suffering: for he understood that he was the child of Astyages' cowherd, and from the journey there, he had learned the whole story from the guides. He said that he had been raised by the cowherd's wife, and he always praised her, and in his story, everything was about Cyno. His parents, having taken this name, so that it might seem more divine to the Persians that the child had survived, spread a rumor that Cyrus, when exposed, had been nursed by a dog.
From there, this story has spread. As Cyrus grew up and became the most courageous and well-liked among his peers, Harpagus was devoted to him, sending gifts, desiring to take revenge on Astyages. For being a private man himself, he did not expect punishment to come upon Astyages, but seeing Cyrus being raised, he made him an ally, comparing Cyrus' sufferings to his own. Before this, Harpagus had done the following: with Astyages being harsh towards the Medes, Harpagus, mixing with each of the leading Medes, persuaded them that they should support Cyrus and put an end to Astyages' reign. Having accomplished this and being ready, Harpagus, wishing to reveal his own plan to Cyrus who was living among the Persians, had no other way to do so, as the roads were guarded. So he devised such a plan: having prepared a hare, and having cut open its belly without removing anything, he placed a written message inside, as it was. Having sewn up the hare's belly and giving nets as if to a hunting servant who was most trustworthy, he sent him to the Persians, instructing him to give the hare to Cyrus from his own mouth, telling him to cut it open himself and not to have anyone present while doing this.
So then, these things were indeed accomplished, and Cyrus, having received the hare, cut it open. Finding the written message inside, he took it and read it, and the writing said these things: "O son of Cambyses, for the gods indeed favor you, as you would not have reached such fortune otherwise. Now, take revenge on Astyages, your own murderer. For according to his eagerness, you have died, but according to the gods and me, you have survived. I think you have long known everything, both about yourself and how you were treated, and what I have suffered under Astyages, because I did not kill you but gave you to the cowherd. Now, if you wish to obey me, rule over the land of Astyages, and you will rule over all of it. For having persuaded the Persians to revolt, lead an army against the Medes. And if I am chosen by Astyages to be the general against you, you will have what you desire, and if some other of the esteemed Medes is chosen, they will be the first to revolt from him and, joining you, will attempt to bring down Astyages. So, with everything here being ready, do these things and do them quickly."
Having heard these things, Cyrus was considering the wisest way to persuade the Persians to revolt, and in his consideration, he found this to be the most opportune: he did these things. Writing what he wanted in a book, he gathered the Persians together, and after unrolling the book and reading from it, he said that Astyages had appointed him as the general of the Persians. "Now," he said, speaking, "O Persians, I announce to you that each of you must come with a sickle." Cyrus had announced these things. There are many tribes of Persians, and Cyrus had gathered some of them and persuaded them to revolt from the Medes. These are the Pasargadae, the Maraphii, and the Maspii. All other Persians rely on these tribes. The Pasargadae are the best, in which the Achaemenidae clan is a part, from which the Persian kings have come. The other Persians are these: the Panthialaei, the Derusiaei, the Germanii. All of these are farmers, while the other nomadic tribes are the Dai, the Mardi, the Dropici, and the Sagartii.
When all were present, having the aforementioned sickles, Cyrus, for there was a thorny place in the Persian land as much as eighteen or twenty stadia in every direction, ordered them to clear this area in a day. When the Persians had completed the assigned task, he told them to come back the next day, cleaned up. In the meantime, Cyrus gathered all his father's flocks and herds and sacrificed them, preparing as if to receive the Persian army, and provided wine and the most suitable foods. When the Persians arrived the next day, he had them recline in a meadow and entertained them. After they had dined, Cyrus asked them whether they preferred what they had the previous day or what was present to them now. They said there was a great difference between the two: the previous day was full of hardships, while the present day was full of good things. Taking this response, Cyrus revealed his entire plan, saying, "Men of Persia, this is how it is for you. If you wish to obey me, you can have these things and countless other good things, without any slave-like labor. If you do not wish to obey me, you will have countless labors similar to yesterday's. Now, therefore, obey me and become free. For I myself seem to have been brought to this position by divine fortune, and I consider you to be no less capable than the Medes in both other matters and in war. So, as things stand, revolt from Astyages as quickly as possible."
Now the Persians, taking Cyrus as their leader, were eager to gain their freedom, having long been unhappy under the rule of the Medes. When Astyages learned that Cyrus was doing these things, he sent a messenger to call him. Cyrus instructed the messenger to report that he would come to Astyages sooner than Astyages himself would wish. Hearing this, Astyages armed all the Medes and, as if he were divinely possessed, appointed Harpagus as their general, forgetting the anger he had towards him. When the Medes, having gone to war, encountered the Persians, some of them fought, those who had not shared in the plan, while others deserted to the Persians, and the majority willingly acted cowardly and fled.
When the Median army was disgracefully disbanded, Astyages, as soon as he learned of it, threatened Cyrus, saying, "Nevertheless, Cyrus will not rejoice." Having said this, he first impaled the Magi who were dream interpreters, those who had advised him to let Cyrus go, and then he armed the remaining Medes in the city, both young and old men. Leading them out and engaging the Persians in battle, they were defeated, and Astyages himself was captured, and he lost the Medes he had led out.
As Astyages was a captive, Harpagus approached him, rejoicing and mocking him, and saying other painful words to him, and indeed asked him about his own banquet, the one where Astyages had served him his son's flesh, what his slavery was like in exchange for his kingship. Astyages, looking at him, asked if he considered Cyrus's deed to be his own. Harpagus said that he had written it, for the matter was justly his own. Astyages declared him to be the most foolish and unjust of all men, most foolish indeed, if, while it was possible for him to become king, if indeed the present events had been brought about through him, he had given the power to another, and most unjust, because he had enslaved the Medes on account of the banquet. For if it was necessary to entrust his kingship to someone else and not to keep it himself, it would be more just to entrust this good thing to a Mede rather than a Persian. Now, however, the Medes, being blameless in this matter, had become slaves instead of masters, and the Persians, who had been slaves before, had now become masters of the Medes.
Astyages, having ruled for thirty-five years, was thus deposed from his kingship, and the Medes submitted to the Persians because of his cruelty, having ruled Asia above the Halys River for one hundred and twenty-eight years, lacking two, except for the time when the Scythians ruled. However, at a later time, they regretted doing these things and revolted from Darius, and having revolted, they were defeated in battle and subdued. Then, during Astyages' time, the Persians and Cyrus, having revolted against the Medes, ruled over Asia from that point. Cyrus, having done no other harm to Astyages, kept him with himself until he died. Thus, Cyrus, having been born and raised, ruled as king, and later, having conquered Croesus, who had begun to do him injustice, as has been said earlier, he ruled over all of Asia in this way.
I know that the Persians follow such customs: they do not establish statues, temples, or altars by law, but they even attribute foolishness to those who make them, as it seems to me, because they did not think that the gods were of human form, as the Greeks are. Instead, they believe that they should go up to the highest parts of the mountains and perform sacrifices to Zeus, calling the whole circle of the sky Zeus. They also sacrifice to the sun, the moon, the earth, fire, water, and the winds. They have been sacrificing to these alone from the beginning, but they have also learned to sacrifice to the Heavenly Aphrodite, having learned from the Assyrians and Arabians. The Assyrians call Aphrodite Mylitta, the Arabians call her Alilat, and the Persians call her Mitra.
The sacrificial practice for the Persians concerning the aforementioned gods is established as follows: they neither make altars nor kindle fire when they are about to sacrifice, nor do they use libations, flute, garlands, or barley meal. Instead, when each person wishes to sacrifice, they lead the animal to a clean place and call upon the god, having adorned their tiara with a wreath, especially of myrtle. Indeed, it is not permitted for the sacrificer to pray for good things for themselves alone, but they pray for the well-being of all the Persians and the king, for he is included among all the Persians. Then, having divided the sacrificial animal limb by limb and boiled the meat, they spread out the softest grass, especially trefoil, and place all the meat upon it. As they arrange it, a Magus, a man standing by, sings the theogony, which they say is the incantation. For without a Magus, it is not lawful for them to perform sacrifices. After waiting a short time, the sacrificer takes away the meat and uses it as they please.
They consider the most important day for each person to be the one on which they were born. On this day, they believe it is right to set forth a greater feast than on other days: the wealthy among them lay out whole roasted oxen, horses, camels, and donkeys, while the less fortunate lay out the smaller parts of sheep. They use few main courses, but many desserts, which are not all served at once. For this reason, the Persians say that the Greeks, when they eat, stop being hungry because they do not have anything worth mentioning brought to them after dinner: if something were brought, they would not stop eating. They are very fond of wine, and it is not allowed for them to vomit or urinate in front of another person. These things are observed in this way, but when they are drunk, they are accustomed to deliberate on the most serious matters. Whatever pleases them while deliberating, the master of the house proposes it to them the next day when they are sober, and when they are deliberating, and if it pleases them also when they are sober, they use it; if it does not please them, they let it go. Whatever they deliberate on while sober, they examine it when they are drunk.
When encountering each other on the roads, one could discern if those meeting are equals in this way: instead of addressing each other, they kiss with their mouths. If one is slightly inferior, they kiss the cheeks. If one is much more inferior, they fall down and worship the other. They honor, above all, those who live closest to themselves, and secondly, those who live next closest; and so, proceeding in order, they honor them. They hold themselves to be by far the best of all people, and they consider others to have merit in proportion to their excellence, and those who live farthest away from them to be the worst. Under the rule of the Medes, the tribes also ruled over each other, with the Medes ruling over all, especially those living closest to them, and these in turn over their neighbors, and those over the next ones, following the same principle as the Persians honor. For the nation advanced, ruling and overseeing.
The Persians adopt foreign customs, especially those of men. For indeed, considering the Median clothing to be more beautiful than their own, they wear it, and in wars, they use Egyptian breastplates. They also practice various forms of luxury, learning about them, and indeed, they engage in pederasty with boys, having learned it from the Greeks. Each of them marries many lawful wives, and they acquire even more concubines.
This manly virtue is highly esteemed among them, to be good in battle and to have many sons. The king sends gifts every year to the one who has the most sons. They consider having many to be strong. They educate their sons, starting from the age of five until twenty, in only three things: to ride, to shoot with a bow, and to speak the truth. Before the child becomes five years old, he does not come into the sight of his father, but stays with the women and has his living there. This is done for this reason: so that if the child dies while being raised, it may not cause any grief to the father.
I praise this law, and I also praise this one: not to kill the king or any Persian for a single reason, nor to inflict an irremediable harm on any of their own servants for a single cause. Instead, if they find that the wrongdoings are more and greater than the services, they use their anger in this way. They say that no one has ever killed their own father or mother, but whatever such things have happened, they claim that all these must be investigated and found to be either children switched at birth or born from adultery. For they say it is not natural for a true parent to be killed by their own child.
What is not allowed for them to do, it is not allowed to speak about either. Lying is considered the most disgraceful among them, and secondly, being in debt, for many other reasons, but they say it is most necessary for the debtor to also tell some lie. If any of the citizens has leprosy or a similar disease, this person does not go down into the city nor mixes with the other Persians. They say that he has these afflictions because he has sinned against the sun. Many of them drive out any foreigner who is caught by these diseases from the country, and they do the same with white doves, for the same reason. They neither urinate nor spit into a river, nor wash their hands, nor allow anyone else to do anything else, but they especially revere rivers.
And this other thing has happened to them in this way: the Persians themselves have been unaware, but we have not been. Their names, being similar to their bodies and their nobility, all end with the same letter, which the Dorians call "san" and the Ionians call "sigma." Investigating this, you will find that the names of the Persians end with this letter, not some but all, in the same way.
I know these things about them for certain to say: however, these things are said as hidden and not clearly about the deceased, that the corpse of a Persian man is not buried before it is torn by a bird or a dog. For I know for certain that the Magi do these things: for they do them openly. So, having covered the corpse in wax, the Persians hide it in the earth. The Magi are separated by much from both the other people and the priests in Egypt. For the priests purify themselves by not killing any living thing, except for what they sacrifice. But the Magi kill everything with their own hands, except for dogs and humans, and they make this a great contest, killing ants, snakes, and other crawling and flying creatures in the same way. Let it be about this custom, how it was also established in the beginning, but I will return to the previous story.
The Ionians and Aeolians, as the Lydians were quickly overthrown by the Persians, sent messengers to Sardis to Cyrus, wanting to be on the same terms with him as they had been obedient to Croesus. He, hearing their proposals, told them a story, saying that a flute-player, seeing fish in the sea, played the flute, thinking that they would come out onto the land. But when he was deceived in his hope, he took a net and cast it around a great number of the fish and drew them out. Seeing them leaping, he then said to the fish, "Stop dancing for me, since you did not want to come out dancing when I played the flute." Cyrus said this story to the Ionians and Aeolians for this reason: because the Ionians, when Cyrus had previously asked them through messengers to revolt from Croesus, did not obey, but now, after the deeds had been done, they were ready to obey Cyrus. So, being angry, he said these things to them. The Ionians, when they heard these things reported, went up to their cities, and each built walls around them, and the others gathered in Panionion, except for the Milesians. For Cyrus made a treaty with them alone on the same terms as the Lydians. The rest of the Ionians thought it best to send messengers to Sparta, asking the Spartans to help the Ionians.
These Ionians, for whom the Panionion is, happened to establish their cities in the most beautiful part of the sky and seasons of all the people we know. For neither the regions above it nor the regions below it nor those towards the east nor those towards the west do the same as Ionia, some being oppressed by the cold and wet, others by the heat and drought. These people, however, have not adopted the same language, but they produce four different ways. Miletus is the first of their cities towards the south, and then Myus and Priene. These are settled in Caria, speaking the same language among themselves, and these are in Lydia: Ephesus, Colophon, Lebedos, Teos, Clazomenae, Phocaea. These cities do not agree with the previously mentioned cities in language, but they agree with themselves. There are still three remaining Ionian cities, of which two inhabit islands, Samos and Chios, and one is established on the mainland, Erythrae. Now, Chios and Erythrae speak the same language, but Samians speak only for themselves. These are the four characters of the language.
These Ionians, then, the Milesians were in the shelter of fear, having made a treaty, and there was nothing terrible for their islanders: for neither were the Phoenicians yet obedient to the Persians nor were the Persians themselves sailors. These were separated from the other Ionians not by anything else, but because the whole Greek race was weak at that time, the Ionian nation was much weaker and of the least account: for except Athens, there was no other city worth mentioning. Now, the other Ionians and the Athenians fled from the name, not wanting to be called Ionians, but even now, many of them seem to me to be ashamed of the name. These twelve cities, however, took pride in the name and established a sanctuary for themselves, to which they gave the name Panionion, and they decided not to share it with any other Ionians (nor were any others asked to share it except the Smyrnaeans).
So, the Dorians from the region now called the Five Cities, but formerly called the Six Cities of the same name, guard against admitting any of the neighboring Dorians into the Triopian sanctuary, but they also expelled from the participation those of their own who had committed a crime concerning the sanctuary. For in the contest of the Triopian Apollo, they used to set up bronze tripods for the winners long ago, and those who received them had to not carry them out of the sanctuary but dedicate them to the god there. A man from Halicarnassus, whose name was Agasicles, having won, disregarded the law and carried the tripod to his own house, nailing it to the wall. Because of this reason, the five cities, Lindus, Ialysus, Camirus, Cos, and Cnidus, expelled the sixth city, Halicarnassus, from the participation. These people, then, imposed this penalty on them.
It seems to me that the Ionians established twelve cities and did not want to admit more for this reason: when they lived in the Peloponnese, there were twelve parts of them, just as there are now twelve parts of the Achaeans who expelled the Ionians. First, there is Pellene near Sicyon, then Aegira and Aegae, where the never-ending river Crathis is, from which the river in Italy got its name, and Bura and Helice, to which the Ionians fled when defeated in battle by the Achaeans, and Aegion, Rhypes, Patrae, Pharae, and Olenus, where the great river Peirus is, and Dyme and Tritaeae, which alone of these dwell inland. These twelve parts are now of the Achaeans and were then of the Ionians.
For this reason, indeed, the Ionians established twelve cities: since it seems to me that these Ionians are more genuine than the other Ionians or have become better, it is very foolish to say. The Abantes from Euboea are not the smallest part, with whom there is no share of the name of Ionia, and Minyans from Orchomenus are mixed with them, and Cadmeans, and Dryopians, and Phocian outcasts, and Molossians, and Pelasgian Arcadians, and Dorians from Epidaurus, and many other tribes are mixed with them. Those of them who set out from the Athenian council chamber and think they are the noblest of the Ionians, these did not bring wives to the colony but had Carians, whose parents they killed. And because of this murder, these women established a law for themselves, drove oaths upon them, and handed them down to their daughters, not ever to sit at the table with their husbands nor to call their own husband by name, for this reason, because they killed their fathers and husbands and children and then, having done these things, lived with them.
These things were happening in Miletus. Some of them established kings from the Lycians, descendants of Glaucus, son of Hippolochus, while others from the Caucones of Pylus, descendants of Codrus, son of Melanthus, and some even from both. But since they are more concerned with the name than the other Ionians, let them be the pure-born Ionians. All Ionians who are of Athenian descent and celebrate the Apaturia festival are Ionians. However, all except the Ephesians and Colophonians celebrate it; for these alone of the Ionians do not celebrate the Apaturia, and they claim not to do so because of a certain murder-related excuse.
The Panionion is a sacred place of Mykale, turned towards the north, set apart by the Ionians in common for Poseidon of Helicon. Mykale is the edge of the mainland leaning towards the west wind, opposite Samos, where the Ionians, gathering from their cities, held a festival to which they gave the name Panionia. Not only have the Ionian festivals experienced this, but also all the festivals of the Greeks end with the same letter, just as the names of the Persians.
These are the Ionian cities, and these are the Aeolian ones: Cyme, called Phriconian, Lerisae, Neon Teichos, Temnos, Cilla, Notion, Aegiroessa, Pitane, Aegaeae, Myrina, and Gryneia. These are the eleven ancient Aeolian cities; for one of them, Smyrna, was taken away by the Ionians. They too had twelve cities on the mainland. These Aeolians, however, obtained a land to settle that was better than the Ionians', but they did not come to a climate that was similar.
Smyrna, however, was lost by the Aeolians in this way: men from Colophon, having been involved in strife and expelled from their homeland, were received by them. Then, the exiles of the Colophonians, watching the Smyrnaeans holding a festival for Dionysus outside the walls, closed the gates and took the city. With all the Aeolians coming to their aid, they used an agreement that the Ionians would return their belongings and leave Smyrna to the Aeolians. Having done this, the Smyrnaeans were divided among themselves by the eleven cities and made citizens of their own cities.
These are the Aeolian cities on the mainland, apart from those dwelling on Ida; for these are separated. The ones possessing the islands are five cities sharing Lesbos (for the sixth city in Lesbos, Arisba, was enslaved by Methymnaeans, being their relatives), and in Tenedos, one city is inhabited, and in the so-called Hundred Isles, another one. Now, for the people of Lesbos and Tenedos, as well as the Ionians who possess the islands, there was no great danger; but the remaining cities decided to follow the Ionians in whatever they might lead.
When the messengers of the Ionians and Aeolians arrived in Sparta (for indeed these matters were being pressed urgently), they chose first of all to speak the man from Phocaea, whose name was Pythermos. He, wearing a purple cloak, so that as many Spartans as possible would gather to inquire, stood and spoke, asking for help for themselves. The Spartans, however, did not listen at all, but it seemed to them not to help the Ionians. These indeed departed, but the Spartans, having repelled the Ionian messengers, nevertheless sent men on a fifty-oared ship, as it seems to me, as spies of both Cyrus' affairs and Ionia. These men, arriving in Phocaea, sent their most esteemed among them, whose name was Lacrines, to Sardis, to ask Cyrus with the words of the Lacedaemonians not to harm any city of the Greek land, as they would not overlook it.
When the herald said these things, Cyrus is said to have asked the men present, who were some Greeks, who the Lacedaemonians were and how many in number they were who declared these things to him. And when he learned, he said to the men who were Lacedaemonians and how many, "I have not feared such men, for whom there is a place in the middle of the city set apart for them to deceive each other by swearing. For them, if I am well, their own affairs, not those of the Ionians, will be the subject of conversation." Cyrus threw these words against all the Greeks, because they set up markets and use buying and selling: for the Persians themselves are not accustomed to use markets at all, nor is there a market at all among them. After these things, entrusting Sardis to Tabalus, a Persian man, and having Pactyes, a Lydian man, carry the gold of both Croesus and the other Lydians, he himself set out for Ecbatana, taking Croesus with him and making no account of the Ionians at first. For Babylon was an obstacle to him, and the Bactrian nation, and the Sacae, and the Egyptians, against whom he himself intended to lead an army, but to send another commander against the Ionians.
But when Cyrus had departed from Sardis, Pactyes caused the Lydians to revolt from both Tabalus and Cyrus, and going down to the sea, since he had all the gold from Sardis, he hired mercenaries and persuaded the men along the coast to join him in waging war. And having marched to Sardis, he besieged Tabalus, who had been shut up in the citadel.
Learning of these things on his journey, Cyrus said to Croesus the following: "Croesus, what will be the end of these things happening to me? The Lydians will not cease, it seems, causing trouble both for me and for themselves. I am considering whether it would be best to enslave them. For now, it seems to me that I have done as if someone killed the father and spared his children. Just as I have taken you, who were more than a father to the Lydians, and left the city to them, and then I am amazed if they have revolted against me." He indeed spoke what he was thinking, but Croesus, fearing that he might make Sardis a desolate city, answered with these words: "O king, you have spoken of what is natural, but do not let all your thoughts be ruled by anger, nor destroy an ancient city that is innocent both of what happened before and of what is happening now. For I did the things before, and I bear the punishment on my head. But Pactyes is the one who is doing wrong now, for you entrusted Sardis to him; let him give you justice. But having forgiveness for the Lydians, give them these orders, so that they neither revolt nor be a danger to you: send them a message to not possess warlike weapons, command them to wear tunics under their garments and to wear knee-boots, and tell them to teach their children to play the lyre and to sing and to be shopkeepers. And soon, O king, you will see them become women instead of men, so that they will not be a danger to you nor revolt."
Croesus indeed suggested these things to him, finding them more preferable for the Lydians than being enslaved and oppressed, knowing that unless he presented a worthy reason, he would not persuade him to change his mind, and fearing that later the Lydians might, if they escaped the present situation, revolt from the Persians and be destroyed. Cyrus, however, was pleased with the advice and, calming his anger, said that he would be persuaded. And calling Mazares, a Mede, he instructed him to give the Lydians the orders that Croesus had suggested, and to enslave all the others who had joined the Lydians in their campaign against Sardis, but to bring Pactyes to him alive by all means.
Indeed, while giving these orders on his journey, Cyrus went on towards the customs of the Persians. Pactyes, however, learning that an army was near and coming against him, fled in fear to Cyme. Mazares the Mede, driving his part of Cyrus' army to Sardis, as much as he had, found that the men around Pactyes were no longer in Sardis. First, he forced the Lydians to carry out Cyrus' orders, and from this command, the Lydians changed their entire way of life. After this, Mazares sent messengers to Cyme, ordering them to hand over Pactyes. The Cymaeans, however, decided to open a consultation with the god at Branchidae. For there was an ancient oracle established there, which all the Ionians and Aeolians were accustomed to consult. This place is in the land of Miletus, above the harbor of Panormus.
So, the Cymaeans sent to the Branchidae their interpreters of divine will to inquire about Pactyes, asking what they should do to please the gods. As they inquired, the oracle responded that they should hand over Pactyes to the Persians. When the Cymaeans heard this response, they prepared to hand him over. But as the crowd was preparing to do this, Aristodicus, the son of Heraclides, a distinguished man among the citizens, held back the Cymaeans from doing this, distrusting the oracle and thinking that the interpreters of divine will were not speaking truthfully. In response to this, a second group of interpreters of divine will went to inquire about Pactyes, among whom was also Aristodicus.
Arriving at Branchidae, Aristodicus, on behalf of all, inquired, asking these things: "Lord, Pactyes the Lydian has come to us as a suppliant, fleeing a violent death from the Persians. They demand him and order the Cymaeans to hand him over. We, fearing the power of the Persians, have not dared to hand over the suppliant until it is clearly revealed to us from you what we should do." As he asked these things, the oracle again showed them the same response, ordering them to hand over Pactyes to the Persians. In response to this, Aristodicus, with forethought, did the following: going around the temple, he removed the sparrows and all the other families of nesting birds that were in the temple. As he was doing this, it is said that a voice came from the inner shrine, addressing Aristodicus and saying these things: "Most impious of men, why do you dare to do this? Do you pluck my suppliants from the temple?" Aristodicus, not at a loss for words, replied, "Lord, do you thus help your suppliants, yet order the Cymaeans to hand over their suppliant?" The god then answered in return with these words: "Yes, I order it, so that you, having committed impiety, may perish sooner, so that you may not come to the oracle in the future concerning the handing over of suppliants."
When the Cymaeans heard this response, not wanting either to be destroyed by handing him over or to be besieged by keeping him, they sent him to Mytilene. Then, with Mazares sending a message demanding the handing over of Pactyes, the Mytileneans prepared to do so for a certain price; for I cannot say this precisely, for it was not completed. For when the Cymaeans learned that these things were being pressed by the Mytileneans, they sent a ship to Lesbos and took Pactyes to Chios. From there, he was taken from the temple of Athena, the city guardian, by the Chians and was handed over. The Chians handed him over in exchange for Atarneus, a district in Mysia opposite Lesbos. Now, the Persians, having received Pactyes, kept him in custody, intending to show him to Cyrus. This was a considerable time when no one from Chios made any offering of barley meal from this Atarneus, nor did they make sacrificial cakes from the produce there, and everything from this region was kept away from all the sacred rituals.
The Chians indeed handed over Pactyes. After this, Mazares campaigned against those who had helped besiege Tabalus, and he enslaved the people of Priene, and he ran through the entire plain of the Maeander, making plunder with his army, and likewise Magnesia. After these things, he immediately died from an illness.
After this man's death, Harpagus came down as the successor of the command, being himself also of Median descent, whom the king of the Medes, Astyages, had feasted with an unlawful meal, the one who had helped Cyrus gain the kingship. This man, then, having been appointed as a general by Cyrus at that time, when he arrived in Ionia, he captured the cities with earthworks. For he would make them walled by piling up earth against the walls, and then he would destroy them.
First, Harpagus attacked Phocaea of Ionia. These Phocaeans were the first among the Greeks to use long sea voyages, and they discovered the Adriatic, Tyrrhenia, Iberia, and Tartessus. They sailed not in round ships but in fifty-oared vessels. Arriving in Tartessus, they became dear to the king of the Tartessians, whose name was Arganthonius, who ruled Tartessus for eighty years and lived for a total of one hundred and twenty. To this man, the Phocaeans became so dear that at first, he urged them to leave Ionia and settle in his land wherever they wanted. Afterward, when he could not persuade the Phocaeans, and he learned that the power of the Medes was growing among them, he gave them money to build a wall around their city, giving it without sparing. For the circuit of the wall is not a few stades, and it is all made of large stones and well-fitted together.
Indeed, the wall for the Phocaeans was built in such a way. When Harpagus advanced his army, he besieged them, proposing terms that if the Phocaeans wished, they should tear down only one section of the wall and dedicate one house to him. The Phocaeans, however, despising slavery, said they wanted to deliberate for one day and then give their answer. In the meantime, they ordered him to lead his army away from the wall. Harpagus said that he knew well what they intended to do, but nevertheless, he allowed them to deliberate. So, when Harpagus led his army away from the wall, the Phocaeans, in the meantime, having launched their fifty-oared ships, embarked their children, women, and all their furniture, and also the statues from the temples and the other dedicatory offerings, except for what was made of bronze or stone or was a painting. Having embarked all the other things and themselves, they sailed to Chios. The Persians took possession of Phocaea, deserted of men.
The Phocaeans, indeed, since the Chians did not want to sell them the islands called Oenussae, fearing that these might become a trading center and their own island be shut out of this, the Phocaeans prepared to sail to Cyrnus. For in Cyrnus, twenty years before this, they had founded a city from an oracle, which was named Alalia. At that time, Arganthonius had already died. As they were preparing to sail to Cyrnus, they first sailed back to Phocaea and killed the Persian guard, which was guarding the city, having received it from Harpagus. After this was accomplished for them, they made strong curses for the part of their people that would be left behind, and in addition to these, they sank an iron anchor and swore not to return to Phocaea before this anchor appeared again. As they were preparing to sail to Cyrnus, more than half of the citizens were seized by longing and pity for the city and the customs of the land, and they became false swearers and sailed back to Phocaea. Those of them who guarded the oath, having set out from the Oenussae islands, sailed.
When the Phocaeans arrived in Cyrnus, they lived together with those who had arrived earlier for five years, and they built temples. Indeed, they led and carried off all the neighboring people. So, the Tyrrhenians and Carthaginians, using a common agreement, made war against them, each with sixty ships. The Phocaeans, having filled their own ships, which were sixty in number, met them in the sea called Sardonian. When they engaged in the naval battle, a sort of Cadmean victory happened for the Phocaeans: for indeed, forty of their ships were destroyed, and the remaining twenty were useless, as their rams were turned aside. Having sailed back to Alalia, they took up their children, women, and the rest of their possessions, as much as their ships could carry, and then, leaving Cyrnus, they sailed to Rhegium.
When the Carthaginians and Tyrrhenians divided the men of the destroyed ships, the Agyllaeans received by lot many of them and led them out and stoned them. After this, for the Agyllaeans, everything that passed through the place where the Phocaeans were stoned became twisted, crippled, and paralyzed, similarly for sheep, draft animals, and people. The Agyllaeans sent to Delphi, wanting to atone for the offense. The Pythia commanded them to do what the Agyllaeans still perform even now: for they greatly sacrifice to them and hold a gymnastic and equestrian contest. These Phocaeans met such a fate, while those who took refuge in Rhegium, setting out from there, acquired a city in this land of Oenotria, which is now called Hyele. They founded this city, having learned from a man of Posidonia that the Pythia had commanded them to found Cyrnus, being a hero, but not the island.
Now concerning Phocaea in Ionia, it happened thus, and the Teians did something similar to this. For when Harpagus took their wall with a mound, they all went into the ships and sailed away to Thrace, and there they founded a city, Abdera, which earlier than this, Timesius of Clazomenae had founded but did not profit from, having been driven out by the Thracians. Now, Timesius receives honors as a hero from the Teians who are in Abdera.
These Ionians, not bearing slavery, alone left their fatherland. The other Ionians, except for the Milesians, came to Harpagus through battle, just like those who left, and each became brave men fighting for their own, but when they were defeated and captured, they remained in their land and carried out the commands. The Milesians, as has been said to me before, having made an oath with Cyrus himself, led a peaceful life. Thus, for the second time, Ionia was enslaved. When Harpagus had subdued the Ionians on the mainland, the Ionians who had the islands, fearing these things, gave themselves to Cyrus.
Now, when the Ionians were in a bad state and gathered no less at the Panionion, I learn that Bias, a man of Priene, offered the most useful advice to the Ionians, by which if they had obeyed, they would have been the most prosperous of the Greeks. He advised the Ionians to sail away together to Sardo and then to found a single city for all Ionians, and thus, having been freed from slavery, they would be prosperous, possessing the largest of all islands and ruling over others. But he said that he did not see freedom remaining for them if they stayed in Ionia. This was the opinion of Bias of Priene, which came to the Ionians when they were ruined. And before Ionia was destroyed, there was also a good opinion of Thales, a man of Miletus, who was of Phoenician descent, who advised the Ionians to have one council, which should be in Teos (for Teos was the center of Ionia), and the other cities should be inhabited no less, as if they were districts. These were the opinions that they received from them.
Harpagus, having subdued Ionia, made a campaign against the Carians, Caunians, and Lycians, leading both Ionians and Aeolians together. Now, these Carians were driven to the mainland from the islands. For in ancient times, being subject to Minos and called Leleges, they held the islands, paying no tribute, as far as I can reach by the furthest inquiry. And they, when Minos needed them, filled the ships. Since Minos was very successful in war and had much land, the Carian nation was the most esteemed of all nations at this time by far. And three inventions were found by them, which the Greeks used: for the Carians were the first to put crests on helmets and to make devices on shields, and they were the first to make grips for shields. Until then, all who used shields carried them without grips, fastening them with leather straps, which lay around their necks and left shoulders. After the Carians, the Dorians and Ionians rose up from the islands much later, and thus they came to the mainland. The Cretans say that the Carians were made in this way, but the Carians themselves do not agree with these, but they believe that they themselves are indigenous mainland people and have always used the same name as they do now. They show an ancient temple of Carian Zeus at Mylasa, which is shared with the Mysians and Lydians as being brothers to the Carians. For they say that Lydus and Mysus are brothers of Car. These indeed share with them, but those who, being of another nation, became of the same language as the Carians, do not share.
The Caunians seem to me to be indigenous, but they themselves say they are from Crete. They have adopted a language either towards the Carian nation or the Carians towards the Caunian (for I cannot distinguish this accurately), but they use customs that are much separated from both other people and the Carians. For it is most beautiful for them to gather together for drinking according to age and friendship, for both men and women and children. When they had established foreign temples, afterwards, as it seemed to them, they decided to worship only their ancestral gods, and all the Caunians of age, putting on their armor, struck the air with their spears, and followed up to the borders of the Calyndians, and said they were expelling the foreign gods.
These people use such customs, and the Lycians have their origin from Crete in ancient times (for all of Crete was held by barbarians in ancient times). When there was a dispute in Crete about the kingship between the sons of Europa, Sarpedon and Minos, as Minos prevailed in the faction, he drove out both Sarpedon and his followers. They, being expelled, came to the land of Asia, which is now inhabited by the Lycians, but in ancient times it was Milyas, and the Milyans were then called Solymi. While Sarpedon ruled them, they were called by the name they brought with them, and even now the Lycians are called Termilae by their neighbors. But when Lycus, the son of Pandion, was also expelled from Athens by his brother Aegeus, he came to the Termilae with Sarpedon, and thus in time the Lycians were named after Lycus. They use customs partly Cretan and partly Carian. They have one particular custom, and they do not agree with any other people in this: they call themselves after their mothers, and not after their fathers. When asked by another who he is, he will enumerate himself through his mother and the mothers of his mother, and if a woman is married to a slave, the children are considered noble; but if a man, even the first of them, has a foreign wife or concubine, the children are dishonored.
Now the Carians, having achieved no brilliant deed, were enslaved by Harpagus, neither the Carians themselves achieving anything, nor those of the Greeks who inhabit this region. Among others, there are also colonists from Lacedaemon, the Cnidians. They, with their land extending to the sea, which is called the Triopion, and being cut off from the Bubassus peninsula, all of the Cnidian land being surrounded by the sea except for a small part (for the Ceramic Gulf cuts it off towards the north wind, and the sea towards Syme and Rhodes towards the south), this small part, being about five stadia, the Cnidians were digging while Harpagus was subverting Ionia, wanting to make their land an island. Everything was happening within them: for where the Cnidian land ends towards the mainland, there is the isthmus they were digging. And indeed, with many of the Cnidians working, they seemed to be wounded more by something divine, both in the other parts of the body and especially in the eyes, as the stone was being broken. They sent to Delphi to consult the oracle about the opposition. The Pythia, as the Cnidians themselves say, responded to them in a three-meter tone as follows: "Do not wall the isthmus nor dig: for Zeus would have made it an island if he had wanted." The Cnidians, with the Pythia having responded this, stopped the digging and, as Harpagus approached with his army, they handed themselves over without a fight.
The Pedaseans were living inland, above Halicarnassus. Whenever something unfavorable was about to happen, both to them and their neighbors, the priestess of Athena would grow a large beard. This happened to them three times. These people, of those around Caria, alone resisted Harpagus for a time and caused him the greatest trouble, fortifying a mountain which is called Lide.
Now then, the Pedaseans were captured in time. And when Harpagus drove his army into the Xanthus plain, the Lycians, going forth and fighting, few against many, showed their valor. But being defeated and driven into the city, they gathered their wives and children and possessions and servants into the acropolis, and then set fire to the entire acropolis. Having done this and sworn terrible oaths, all the Xanthians went forth and died fighting. Of the Lycians who now say they are Xanthians, the majority, except for eighty households, are of foreign descent. These eighty households happened to be away at that time and thus survived. Harpagus indeed took Xanthus in this way, and similarly, he took Caunus: for the Caunians also imitated the Lycians in most things.
Now then, Harpagus was causing destruction in the lower parts of Asia, while Cyrus himself, in the upper parts, was overthrowing every nation and leaving nothing aside. Now, of these, we will pass over the majority; but those that caused him the greatest trouble and are most worthy of being described, I will mention.
Now then, after Cyrus had made all the mainland subject to him, he attacked the Assyrians. In Assyria, there are indeed many other great cities, but the most famous and strongest, and where their kingship was established after the destruction of Ninus, was Babylon, being such a city as follows. It lies in a great plain, each side being a hundred and twenty stadia in length, forming a square. These stadia make the circuit of the city a total of four hundred and eighty. Now, the size of the Babylonian city is so great, and it was adorned like no other city we know. First, a deep and wide moat filled with water surrounds it, and then a wall with a width of fifty royal cubits and a height of two hundred cubits. The royal cubit is larger than the common cubit by three fingers.
Now then, it is necessary for me to explain further both how the earth from the moat was used and in what manner the wall was constructed. While digging the moat, they made bricks from the earth that was being brought out of the excavation. Having drawn out a sufficient number of bricks, they baked them in kilns. Then, using hot bitumen as mortar and placing layers of woven reeds every thirty rows of bricks, they first built the edges of the moat and then the wall itself in the same manner. On top of the wall, near the ends, they built single-room houses facing each other, with enough space in between for a four-horse chariot to pass. There are a hundred gates around the wall, all made of bronze, as well as matching posts and lintels. There is another city, eight days' journey from Babylon, called Is. There is a not-so-large river there, also named Is, which flows into the Euphrates River. This river Is, then, brings up many lumps of bitumen with its water, from which the bitumen was carried to the wall in Babylon.
Now then, Babylon was walled in such a manner, and there are two parts of the city. For the middle of it is divided by a river, which is named Euphrates, flowing from the Armenians, being large and deep and swift, and it flows out into the Red Sea. Thus, the wall on each side extends its corners to the river. From there, the curved parts along each bank of the river extend a fence of baked bricks. The city itself, being full of three-story and four-story houses, is divided by straight streets, both the others and those that lead to the river. Along each street, in the fence by the river, gates have been placed, as many as there are lanes, equal in number. These gates were also made of bronze and led to the river itself.
Now then, this wall serves as armor, and another wall runs inside, not much weaker than the other wall, but narrower. In each part of the city, it was walled in the middle: in one part, the royal palace with a large and strong enclosure, and in the other part, the sanctuary of Zeus Belus with bronze gates, and to me, it still exists, measuring two stadia on all sides, being square. In the middle of the sanctuary, a solid tower has been built, both in length and width a stadia, and on this tower, another tower has been placed, and another one on top of this, up to eight towers. A way up to them has been made from the outside, going around all the towers. In the middle of the ascent, there is both a descent and resting places with seats, where those going up may sit and rest. In the last tower, there is a large shrine, and in the shrine, a large bed is laid out well, and a golden table is set beside it. However, there is no statue set up there, nor does anyone spend the night there among humans, except for one woman alone of the locals, whom the god chooses from all, as the Chaldaeans, who are priests of this god, say.
These same people say, not convincing me, that the god himself goes into the shrine and rests on the bed, just as in Thebes of Egypt in the same manner, as the Egyptians say. For indeed, there too, a woman sleeps in the temple of Theban Zeus, and both of these women are said not to have any relations with men. And just as in Patara of Lycia, the prophetess of the god, when she becomes one: for then, there is not always an oracle there, but when she becomes one, then she spends the nights inside the shrine.
There is, however, another shrine below the one in Babylon, where there is a large statue of Zeus sitting, made of gold, and a large golden table is set beside it, and the footstool and the throne are also made of gold. And as the Chaldaeans said, these things are made of eight hundred talents of gold. Outside the shrine, there is a golden altar, and there is also another large altar, on which the adult animals of the flocks are sacrificed. For on the golden altar, it is not allowed to sacrifice anything but young animals, and on the larger altar, the Chaldaeans offer a thousand talents of frankincense each year when they celebrate the festival for this god. There was also, at that time, in this sacred area, a solid gold statue of twelve cubits. I did not see it, but I speak of what is said by the Chaldaeans. Darius, the son of Hystaspes, plotted to take this statue but did not dare to take it. Xerxes, the son of Darius, took it and killed the priest who forbade him to move the statue. This temple is adorned in this way, and there are also many other private offerings.
Of this Babylon, many kings indeed and others came to be, of whom I will make mention in the Assyrian stories, who adorned the walls and the temples. And among them, there were also two women. The one who ruled earlier, having been five generations before the later one, her name was Semiramis. She took on the construction of dikes on the plain, which were worthy of admiration. Before this, the river used to flood the entire plain.
The second queen of this Babylon, whose name was Nitocris, being wiser than the one who ruled earlier, left these memorials which I will describe, and seeing the great and unshakable power of the Medes, who had taken other cities for themselves, including Ninus, she protected her city as much as possible. First, she made the Euphrates River, which flowed straight before and runs through the middle of their city, so winding by digging canals upstream that it comes to an Assyrian village called Ardericca three times while flowing. And now, those who sail from this sea to Babylon, sailing down the Euphrates River, come to the same village three times in three days. She did this and provided an embankment worthy of admiration along both edges of the river. Further below Babylon, she dug a reservoir for a lake, extending a little from the river, always digging deep to the water, and making its circumference twenty and four hundred stadia. She poured the excavated soil from this digging along the edges of the river. And after she had dug, she drove a stone quay around it. She did both these things, making the river winding and the entire reservoir a lake, so that the river would be slower, bending around many curves, and the passages to Babylon would be winding, and from the passages, a long detour around the lake would be required. She worked on this part of the land where the entrances were and the shortest route from the Medes, so that the Medes, mingling with them, would not learn of her affairs.
Indeed, she surrounded herself with this deep river, and she made such an addition from it. The city being two parts, and the river holding the middle, it was necessary for anyone who wished to cross from one part to the other to cross by boat, and this, as I think, was troublesome. She, however, foresaw this. For when she was digging the reservoir for the lake, she left this other memorial from the same work: she cut long stones, and when the stones were ready and the place was dug, she diverted the entire flow of the river into the place she had dug, and while this was filling up, she built the edges of the river within the city and the descents from the gates to the river with baked bricks, in the same manner as the wall. And with the stones she had dug, she built a bridge in the middle of the city, binding the stones with iron and lead. She stretched square logs across it, on which the Babylonians made their crossing; and at night, they removed these logs for this reason, so that they would not steal from each other at night. But when the dug lake was full of water from the river and the bridge was adorned, she led the Euphrates River from the lake into the ancient channels, and thus the dug lake, having become a swamp, seemed to have been made as needed, and a bridge was prepared for the citizens.
This same queen devised such a trick: she built a tomb for herself high above the most frequented gates of the city, and she inscribed on the tomb these words: "If any of my successors as king of Babylon is in need of money, let him open the tomb and take as much money as he wants. But let him not open it otherwise, for it is not better." This tomb remained untouched until the kingdom came to Darius. And to Darius, it seemed terrible not to use these gates and not to take the money lying there and called for by the inscription. He did not use these gates for this reason: the dead body was above his head as he passed through. But when he opened the tomb, he found no money, but the dead body and these words: "If you were not insatiable for money and greedy, you would not have opened the tombs of the dead." Now, this queen's reign is said to have been such.
Cyrus, indeed, waged war against this woman's son, who had his father's name, Labynetus, and the rule of the Assyrians. The great king went on a campaign well-equipped with food from home and livestock, and indeed, he also brought water from the Choaspes River, which flows by Susa, the only water the king drinks and no other river's. This water of the Choaspes, having been boiled, many four-wheeled mule wagons carrying it in silver vessels followed, wherever he went each time.
And when Cyrus, going towards Babylon, came to the Gyndes River, whose springs are in the Matieni mountains and it flows through the Dardaneans, and it discharges into another river, the Tigris, which, flowing by the city of Opis, discharges into the Red Sea, this Gyndes River, indeed, Cyrus tried to cross, being navigable by ships, there one of his sacred white horses, trying to cross the river, was carried away by the current, having entered it out of arrogance. Cyrus was very angry at the river for this outrage, and he threatened that he would make it so weak that from then on, even women would easily cross it without wetting their knees. But after the threat, he put off the march to Babylon and divided the army in two, and having divided it, he stretched out ropes and received 180 trenches dug on each side of the bank of the Gyndes, turned in every way, and having arranged the army, he ordered them to dig. And as a large group worked, the work was indeed accomplished, but they spent the entire summer there, working.
But when Cyrus had punished the Gyndes River, having divided it into 360 trenches, and the second spring was shining, he indeed marched towards Babylon. The Babylonians, having gone out to war, awaited him. And when he came near the city, the Babylonians fought and, having been defeated in the battle, were driven back into the city. But, having known beforehand that Cyrus was not fearful, and seeing him attacking every nation equally, they had prepared food for many years. These people had no concern for the siege, but Cyrus was in difficulties, as much time was passing and nothing of the affairs was advancing further.
Whether then someone advised him who was in difficulty, or he himself learned what was to be done, he indeed did this: arranging the entire army from the entrance of the river, where it flows into the city, and again behind the city, arranging others where the river flows out of the city, he told the army that when they saw the stream become passable, to enter the city this way. So indeed, having arranged and advised accordingly, he himself went away with the non-fighting part of the army. And arriving at the lake, what the Babylonian kingdom had done both along the river and along the lake, Cyrus also did other such things: for having led the river into the lake, which was a marsh, he made the ancient stream passable, the river having subsided. And when this happened, the Persians who were arranged for this very thing, entered Babylon along the stream of the Euphrates River, which had subsided to about the middle of a man's thigh. Now, if the Babylonians had known beforehand or learned what was being done by Cyrus, they would have destroyed the Persians who entered the city: for having closed all the gates that led to the river and having gone up themselves to the embankments along the edges of the river, they would have taken them as if in a trap. But now, the Persians appeared unexpectedly to them. And because of the city's great size, as is said by those who lived there, those in the outer parts of the city were captured, while those in the middle of the city, the Babylonians, did not learn they were captured, but they happened to be having a festival, and at this time they were dancing and being in a state of pleasure, until they indeed learned the very truth.
And Babylon was indeed captured for the first time then. I will show the power of the Babylonians in many other ways, but also in this: all the land that he rules is divided for the great king's food for himself and his army, apart from the tribute. The Babylonian land feeds him for four months of the year, and the rest of Asia for the remaining eight months. Thus, the Assyrian land is one-third of the power of the rest of Asia. And the rule of this land, which the Persians call "satrapy," is much the strongest of all the rulers, when Tritantaechmes, the son of Artabazus, having the rule of this province from the king, had a full artaba of silver added to him each day. The artaba, being a Persian measure, holds more than an Attic medimnus by three Attic choenixes. And his horses were private, apart from the warhorses, the stallions being eight hundred, and the mares sixteen thousand: for each of these stallions mounted twenty mares. And such a large number of Indian dogs were kept that four large villages of the plain, being exempt from other tasks, were ordered to provide food for the dogs. Such things indeed belonged to the ruler of Babylon.
The land of the Assyrians indeed has little rain, and this is what nourishes the root of the grain: however, being watered from the river, the crop is made strong and the grain is produced, not as in Egypt where the river itself rises into the fields, but being watered by hand and with swinging beams. For the whole Babylonian land, just as the Egyptian, is cut into canals: and the greatest of the canals is navigable, turned towards the winter sun, and it flows from the Euphrates River into another river, the Tigris, by which the city of Ninus is inhabited. This land is by far the best of all the lands we know for producing the fruit of Demeter... For indeed the other trees it does not even attempt to bear, neither fig tree nor vine nor olive. But the fruit of Demeter is so good that it yields on the whole two hundred times, and when it bears at its best, it yields three hundred times. The leaves of the wheat and barley there become four fingers wide easily. And from millet and sesame, as large as a tree's size, I will not make mention, well knowing that those who have not gone to the Babylonian land and the things said about the crops would come to great disbelief. They use no oil except what they make from sesame. And there are palm trees growing throughout the whole plain, most of them fruit-bearing, from which they make food and wine and honey: they take care of these trees in the manner of fig trees and the male palms, which the Greeks call "ersenes," they bind to the date-bearing palm trees so that the gall-fly entering the date may cause it to swell and that the fruit of the palm tree may not fall off: for indeed the male palms bear gall-flies in their fruit just as the wild figs do.
The whole wonder to me, greatest of all besides the city itself, I will go on to tell: the boats which go down the river to Babylon are round and all of skin. For when they have cut willow branches in the land of the Armenians who dwell above the Assyrians, they make frames with them, and stretch hides outside over the frames, making them round like a shield, neither cutting off the stern nor narrowing the prow, but making them round like a shield, and filling the whole boat with reeds, they let it go down the river, loaded with cargo: and most of all they carry palm wood casks of wine. And the boat is steered by two oars and two men standing upright, and one of them pulls the oar inside and the other pushes it outside. And these boats are made very large and very small: and the largest of them have a cargo of five thousand talents. And in each boat there is a live donkey, and in the larger ones more than one. So when they have arrived floating down to Babylon and have sold their cargo, they sell the reeds and the frame of the boat, and the hides they put on the donkeys and drive them back to the Armenians. For it is not possible to sail up the river by any means because of the swiftness of the current; and for this reason, they do not make the boats of wood but of hides. And when they have driven the donkeys back to the Armenians, they make other boats in the same way.
Indeed, their boats are such: and they use clothing like this, a long linen tunic, and over this, they put on another woolen tunic and wrap themselves in a white cloak, having local shoes, similar to the Boeotian sandals. They bind their heads with caps and have their whole body perfumed. Each one has a seal and a hand-made staff: and on each staff, there is made either an apple or a rose or a lily or an eagle or something else: for it is not their custom to have a staff without a symbol.
This, indeed, is their attire for the body: and their customs are established as follows, the wisest in my opinion, which I also learn the Eneti of Illyria use. In each village, once a year, they did the following: when the maidens became of marriageable age, they gathered them all together in one place, and a crowd of men stood around them, and a crier, presenting each one in turn, sold them, first the most beautiful of all: and after, when this one, having found much gold, was sold, he would announce another who was the most beautiful after her: and they were sold for cohabitation. The wealthiest of the Babylonians who were marrying would outbid each other to buy the most beautiful ones: but those of the common people who were marrying, they would take the less beautiful ones and the money. For when the crier had finished selling the most beautiful of the maidens, he would announce the least beautiful, or if any of them were disabled, and whoever was willing to take the least gold to cohabit with her, to him it was laid down. And the gold came from the sale of the beautiful maidens, and thus the beautiful ones gave dowries to the less beautiful and the disabled. It was not allowed for each one to give his daughter to whomever he wanted, nor to take away the maiden having bought her without a guarantor, but he had to establish guarantors that he would cohabit with her, and then take her away. And if they did not get along, it was the custom to return the gold. It was also allowed for the one who wanted to buy from another village. Now, this was the most beautiful custom for them, but it does not continue now, but they have found something else recently to happen so that they do not wrong them nor lead them to another city: for after they were captured and ruined, each one of the common people, lacking a livelihood, prostituted their female children.
And second in wisdom, another custom is established for them: they bring the sick to the marketplace. For they do not use doctors. So, approaching the sick person, they advise about the illness, if someone himself has suffered such a thing as the sick person has or has seen another suffering, approaching, they advise and recommend what he himself did to escape a similar illness or saw another escape. But it is not allowed for them to pass by the sick person in silence, before they have asked what kind of illness they have.
And their burials are in honey, and their lamentations are similar to those in Egypt. And whenever a Babylonian man has intercourse with his wife, he sits by incense being burned, and the woman does the same thing elsewhere, and when dawn comes, they both wash: for they will not touch any vessel before they wash. And the Arabians do the same things as these.
But indeed the most shameful of the customs for the Babylonians is this: it is necessary for every native woman to sit in the temple of Aphrodite once in her life and have intercourse with a foreign man. And many, not wishing to mingle with the others, being proud of their wealth, stand in covered carriages by the temple; and a large retinue follows them. But the majority do this: many women sit in the precinct of Aphrodite, having a wreath around their heads made of cord; some come, and some go. And there are all sorts of paths through the women, marked by cords, through which the foreign men pass and choose. And when a woman sits there, she does not leave for her home before a foreign man gives her money and has intercourse with her outside the temple; and when he gives the money, he must say this: "I call upon you in the name of the goddess Mylitta." The Assyrians call Aphrodite Mylitta. And the money is as much as he wants to give; for she will not refuse it, for it is not lawful for her: for this money becomes sacred. And she follows the first man who gives her money and does not reject anyone. And when she has had intercourse, having fulfilled her duty to the goddess, she returns to her home, and from then on, no matter how much you give her, you will not persuade her. Now, those who are beautiful and tall quickly leave, but those who are unattractive remain for a long time, not being able to fulfill the law; for they stay even three or four years. And in some parts of Cyprus, there is a similar custom to this.
Indeed, these customs are established for the Babylonians: and there are three tribes of them that eat nothing else but only fish, which they catch and then dry in the sun, and they do the following: they put them into a mortar and, having crushed them, they strain them through a linen cloth, and whoever wishes to have them, either kneads them like dough and has them, or bakes them like bread.
And when Cyrus had subdued this nation as well, he desired to make the Massagetae subject to himself. This nation is said to be both great and powerful, dwelling towards the east and the rising of the sun, beyond the Araxes River, and opposite the Issedones men. And there are those who say that this nation is indeed Scythian.
The Araxes is said to be both larger and smaller than the Ister; and they say that there are many islands in it, similar in size to Lesbos, and in them, people who dig up various roots in the summer for food, and find fruits from trees for sustenance in the winter, and they have discovered trees bearing such fruits that when they gather around a fire and throw them into it, they become intoxicated by the smell as Greeks do with wine, and the more fruit they throw into the fire, the more intoxicated they become, until they rise to dance and sing. This is said to be their way of life. The Araxes River flows from the Matieni, from where also the Gyndes, which Cyrus divided into 360 channels, and it discharges through forty mouths, all of which, except for one, flow into marshes and swamps, where people are said to live who eat raw fish and wear sealskin clothing. The one remaining mouth of the Araxes flows through a clear path into the Caspian Sea.
The Caspian Sea is separate and does not mix with the other sea. For the sea that the Greeks sail on, and the sea beyond the pillars, called the Atlantic, and the Red Sea, all happen to be one. But the Caspian is separate, being in length a voyage of fifteen days by rowing, and in width, where it is widest, a journey of eight days. And the Caucasus, which is a mountain range both very large in number and very high in height, stretches along the western side of this sea. The Caucasus contains many and various nations of people within it, most of them living off the wild forest. Among them, it is said that there are trees that produce leaves of such a kind that when they are rubbed and mixed with water, they paint animals on their clothing, and the animals cannot be washed out but wear out together with the rest of the fabric as if they were woven in from the beginning. And it is evident that these people have intercourse openly, just like animals.
Indeed, the Caucasus forms the western border of this sea called the Caspian, while to the east and where the sun rises, an immeasurable plain extends as far as the eye can see. Of this great plain, the Massagetae occupy no small portion, against whom Cyrus had a desire to wage war. For there were many and great things that raised and urged him on, first, his birth, which seemed to be something more than human, and secondly, the good fortune he had experienced in wars; for wherever Cyrus set out to wage war, it was impossible for that nation to escape.
Now, there was a queen of the Massagetae, a widow, whose name was Tomyris. Cyrus, sending a message, sought her in marriage, wanting to have a wife whom he could possess. But Tomyris, understanding that he was not seeking her but the kingdom of the Massagetae, refused the proposal. After this, Cyrus, since his deceit did not advance him, led his army to the Araxes River and openly prepared for war against the Massagetae, both building bridges for the crossing of the river by his army and constructing towers on the ships that ferried across the river.
As he was engaged in this task, Tomyris sent a herald who spoke these words: "O King of the Medes, cease hastening what you hasten; for you do not know if it will be timely for these things to be accomplished. Cease and rule over your own people, and bear with us ruling over those whom we rule. Yet, if you are not willing to use these suggestions, but rather desire to be at war than in peace, then stop your labor of bridging the river, and when we have withdrawn from the river a three days' journey, cross over into our land. Or if you prefer to receive us rather into your land, do the same." Hearing this, Cyrus called together the leading Persians, and having gathered them, he set before them the matter, seeking advice on which course to take. And their opinions all coincided, urging to receive Tomyris and her army into their land.
Present and disagreeing with this opinion, Croesus the Lydian showed an opposing view to the one proposed, saying these things: "O King, I have already told you that since Zeus has given me to you, I will, according to my power, avert any harm to your house that I see coming. My misfortunes, being bitter, have become lessons. If you think you are immortal and command such an army, there would be no need for me to reveal my opinion to you. But if you have recognized that you are a man and rule over others like you, first learn this: that there is a cycle of human affairs, and it does not allow the same people to always prosper. Now, I have an opinion concerning the matter at hand opposite to these men. For if we are willing to receive the enemy into our land, there is this danger in it: if defeated, you lose your entire rule. For it is clear that if the Massagetae are victorious, they will not flee to the rear but will attack your provinces. But if you are victorious, you do not win as much as if you crossed into their land, defeated the Massagetae, and pursued them in flight. For I will set the same thing against that: if you defeat the opponents, you will go straight to the rule of Tomyris. Apart from the disgrace and the intolerable fact that Cyrus, the son of Cambyses, yields and retreats from the land to a woman. Now, it seems to me that we should cross over and advance as far as they withdraw, and from there, attempt to overcome them by doing these things. For as I understand, the Massagetae are inexperienced in Persian goods and untouched by great luxuries. So, to these men, without sparing, cut up many sheep and goats and prepare a feast in our camp, and also provide many bowls of undiluted wine and all kinds of food. Having done this, leave behind the least valuable part of the army, while the rest retreat again to the river. For if I am not mistaken in my judgment, they, seeing many good things, will turn to them, and the task of overcoming them will be left to us in the aftermath of great deeds."
These opinions clashed, and Cyrus, abandoning his previous opinion and choosing that of Croesus, announced to Tomyris that he would cross over to her as she withdrew, as he intended to do so. She indeed withdrew as she had first promised. Cyrus then placed Croesus in the hands of his own son Cambyses, to whom he was giving the kingdom, and instructed him to both honor and treat him well if the crossing against the Massagetae did not succeed. Having given these instructions and sent them to the Persians, he himself crossed the river, and his army with him.
After he crossed the Araxes, as night came on, while sleeping in the land of the Massagetae, Cyrus saw a vision like this: he thought in his sleep that he saw the eldest son of Hystaspes with wings on his shoulders, and with these wings, he overshadowed Asia on one side and Europe on the other. Now, Hystaspes, son of Arsames, was an Achaemenid man, and his eldest son Darius was about twenty years old at that time, and this son had been left behind in Persia, for he was not yet of age to go to war. So when Cyrus awoke, he considered the vision. And as he thought the vision to be great, he called Hystaspes and, taking him aside, said, "Hystaspes, your son has been caught plotting against me and my rule. How I know this for certain, I will explain: the gods care for me and show me all the things that are coming. So now, in the past night, while sleeping, I saw your eldest son with wings on his shoulders, and with these wings, he overshadowed Asia on one side and Europe on the other. There is no way, then, that this vision means anything other than that he is plotting against me. Now, you must go back to Persia as quickly as possible and make it so that when I come there after subduing these lands, you will present your son to me for examination."
Cyrus, thinking that Darius was plotting against him, said these things; but the divine power was showing him that he himself was about to meet his end in this place, and his kingdom would pass to Darius. So Hystaspes responded with these words: "O King, may there not be a Persian man who would plot against you, and if there is, may he perish as quickly as possible; for you have made the Persians free instead of slaves, and rulers of all instead of being ruled by others. But if a vision tells you that my younger son is plotting against you, I give him to you to use as you wish."
After responding with these words, Hystaspes crossed the Araxes and went to Persia to watch over his son Darius for Cyrus, while Cyrus, advancing from the Araxes, made a day's journey according to the advice of Croesus. Afterward, Cyrus and the main part of the Persian army drove back to the Araxes, leaving behind the less capable soldiers. A third of the Massagetae forces then attacked the remaining Persian soldiers, killing them as they defended themselves, and seeing the feast that had been prepared, they reclined and feasted after defeating their opponents, becoming filled with food and wine and falling asleep. The Persians then attacked, killing many of them, and capturing even more, including others and Tomyris's son, who was leading the Massagetae, and his name was Spargapises.
When she learned about the events concerning the army and her son, she sent a messenger to Cyrus and said these things: "Cyrus, insatiable for blood, do not be lifted up by this deed that has happened, if by the fruit of the vine, with which you yourselves, when filled, become so mad that as the wine goes down into the body, evil words rise up in you, with such a drug you have deceived and captured my son, but not by a battle of strength. Now, therefore, take my advice and accept this word: give me back my son and go away from this land unpunished, having insulted a third of the Massagetae army. But if you do not do these things, I swear to you by the sun, the lord of the Massagetae, that I will indeed satisfy you, insatiable as you are for blood."
Cyrus, indeed, made no account of these words when they were reported to him. But Tomyris's son, Spargapises, when the wine released him and he learned where he was in misfortune, having asked Cyrus to be freed from his bonds, obtained it. And when he was released as quickly as possible and gained control of his hands, he took his own life.
And indeed, he met his end in such a manner: Tomyris, when Cyrus did not listen to her, gathered all her power and fought against Cyrus. I judge this battle to have been the strongest of all the battles of barbarian men that took place, and indeed, I learn that this happened so. For first, they are said to have stood apart from each other and shot arrows, and then, when their missiles were used up, they came together with spears and hand weapons and fought. They stood fighting for a long time, and neither side was willing to flee. In the end, the Massagetae prevailed, and indeed, a great part of the Persian army was destroyed there, and Cyrus himself met his end, having ruled for a total of thirty years lacking one. Tomyris, having filled a skin with human blood, sought the body of Cyrus among the dead Persians, and when she found it, she put his head into the skin, and while she was abusing the corpse, she said these things: "You have destroyed me, living and victorious in battle, by capturing my son through deceit; but I, as I threatened, will satisfy you with blood." These things, indeed, concerning the end of Cyrus's life, with many stories being told, this one has been said to me as the most believable.
The Massagetae wear clothing similar to the Scythian and have a similar way of life. They are both horsemen and footmen (for they partake in both), and both archers and spearmen, considering it customary to have battle-axes. They use gold and bronze for everything: for all things relating to spear-points, arrow-heads, and battle-axes, they use bronze, and for all things concerning the head and belts and armlets, they adorn with gold. In the same way, they put bronze breastplates around the horses' chests, and gold around the reins, bits, and cheekplates. They do not use iron or silver at all: for neither is found in their land, but gold and bronze are abundant.
They use customs such as these: each man marries a woman, but they share these women among themselves. For the Greeks say that the Scythians do this, but it is not the Scythians who do it, but the Massagetae. For when a Massagetae man desires a woman, he hangs his quiver in front of her wagon and has intercourse without fear. There is no other limit to their age, but when one becomes very old, all his relatives come together and sacrifice him along with other livestock, and having cooked the meat, they feast. These things are considered the most blessed for them, but they do not eat the one who dies from illness, but they bury him in the ground, lamenting that he did not reach the point of being sacrificed. They sow nothing but live off livestock and fish, which come to them in abundance from the Araxes River. They are milk-drinkers. They worship only the sun as their god and sacrifice horses to it. This is the reasoning behind the sacrifice: they give the fastest of all mortal creatures to the fastest of the gods.