And when Cyrus had died, Cambyses, the son of Cyrus and Cassandane, daughter of Pharnaspes, took over the kingdom. Cassandane, having died before Cyrus, he himself had made great mourning for her and had ordered all those under his rule to mourn as well. Cambyses, being the son of this woman and Cyrus, considered the Ionians and Aeolians as hereditary slaves, and he set out on an expedition against Egypt, taking with him others from those he ruled, and indeed also Greeks who were under his power.
The Egyptians, before Psammetichus became their king, believed themselves to be the first of all mankind. But when Psammetichus became king and desired to know which people were the first, from that point they considered the Phrygians to be older than themselves, and of the others, themselves. Psammetichus, as he was unable to find any way to learn this, who were the first of mankind, devised such a plan. He gave two newborn human children to a shepherd to raise among the sheep, with some kind of nourishment like this, having ordered that no one should let any sound come before them, but that they should be kept in a deserted shelter by themselves, and at the proper time he should bring goats to them, and having filled them with milk, he should do the other things. Psammetichus both did this and ordered it, wanting to hear from the children, having been freed from the meaningless noises, what sound they would first utter. And indeed, it happened. For when a period of two years had passed with the shepherd doing these things, as he opened the door and entered, both children fell upon him, stretching out their hands, and called "Bekos." At first, having heard this, the shepherd was silent; but as he often came and took great care, this word was often spoken. Thus, he showed the children to the master, having been ordered to bring them into his sight. And Psammetichus himself, having heard, inquired which people call something "Bekos," and having inquired, he found that the Phrygians call bread this. Thus, the Egyptians conceded, and having measured by such a matter, they considered the Phrygians to be older than themselves. This is how I heard it happened from the priests of Hephaestus who were in Memphis. The Greeks, however, say many other vain things and that Psammetichus, having cut out the tongues of women, thus made the children's way of life with these women.
As for the nourishment of the children, they said so much; but I also heard other things when I came to Memphis and spoke with the priests of Hephaestus. And indeed, I also turned to Thebes and the city of the Sun for the sake of these things, wishing to know if they would agree with the stories in Memphis; for the Heliopolitans are said to be the most learned of the Egyptians. Now, I am not eager to explain the divine matters of the stories I heard, except for their names alone, thinking that all people know about them equally; but I will remember them when compelled by the story.
As for human affairs, they said, agreeing with themselves, that the Egyptians were the first of all men to discover the year, having divided it into twelve parts according to the seasons; and they said that they found this out from the stars: and they reckon to be so much wiser than the Hellenes, as I think, inasmuch as the Hellenes insert an intercalary month for the sake of the seasons every third year, whereas the Egyptians, reckoning the twelve months at thirty days each, add five days in addition to the number, and thus the circle of their seasons comes round to the same point. And they said that the Egyptians were the first to use the names of the twelve gods, and that the Hellenes took them up from them; and that they were the first to assign altars and images and temples to the gods, and to carve figures in stone. And of these things they showed me that the greater part had come to pass thus. They said moreover that the first man who became king of Egypt was Min; and that in his time all Egypt, except the Thebaic region, was a marsh, and none of the regions were then above water which now lie below the lake of Moiris, to which lake it is a voyage of seven days up the river from the sea.
And they seemed to me to speak well concerning the land: for it is clear indeed even to one who has not heard it before but sees it, whoever has understanding, that Egypt, to which the Hellenes sail, is land acquired by the Egyptians and a gift of the river, and the land up to three days' journey above this lake, about which they said nothing further of this kind, is of another such kind. For the nature of the land of Egypt is as follows. First, when sailing to it and still a day's journey away from the land, if you let down a sounding line, you will bring up mud and be in eleven fathoms of water. This indicates that the land extends so far out into the sea.
Moreover, the length of Egypt's coast is sixty schoeni, which we reckon to be the part of Egypt from the Plinthinete Gulf to the Serbonian Marsh, beside which the Casian Mountain extends. From this, then, the sixty schoeni are. For as many people as are land-measurers, they have measured the land in feet; those who are less so, in stadia; those who have much, in parasangs; and those who have exceedingly abundant, in schoeni. Now, the parasang is able to be thirty stadia, and the schoenus, being an Egyptian measure, sixty stadia.
Thus, there would be 3,600 stadia of Egypt by the sea. From there, even up to Heliopolis, the inland Egypt is wide, being all low-lying and watery and marshy. And there is a journey to Heliopolis from the sea, going up, similar in length to the road from Athens, which leads from the altar of the twelve gods to Pisa and the temple of Olympian Zeus. One would find a small difference when calculating these roads, not being equal in length, no more than fifteen stadia: for the road to Pisa from Athens falls short of being 1,500 stadia by fifteen, while the road to Heliopolis from the sea fills up to this number.
From Heliopolis, going up, Egypt is narrow. For on one side, the mountain range of Arabia stretches, bearing from the north towards the south and the noon, always extending upwards to the so-called Red Sea: in which are the quarries that were cut for the pyramids in Memphis. This mountain range bends back to the aforementioned places: and on the other side, it is farthest from itself, as I learned, being a journey of two months from east to west, and its eastern boundaries are said to produce frankincense. This mountain range is such, and the one towards Libya of Egypt stretches another rocky range, in which the pyramids are, covered with sand, in the same manner as the Arabian range bearing towards the south. So then, from Heliopolis, there is not much space left for Egypt to be, but as much as a journey of fourteen days going up, Egypt is narrow, being the space between the mountains mentioned, flat land indeed, and it seemed to me to be, at its narrowest, no more than two hundred stadia from the Arabian mountain to the so-called Libyan. And from there, Egypt is wide again. This land is naturally so.
From Heliopolis to Thebes, it is a nine-day journey by river, and the distance of the journey is four thousand eight hundred and sixty stadia, being eighty-one schoeni. These stadia, when combined, show that the part of Egypt along the sea has already been made clear to me before, being three thousand six hundred stadia, and as for how much it is from the sea to the inland region up to Thebes, I will indicate: for there are six thousand one hundred and twenty stadia. And from Thebes to the city called Elephantine, there are one thousand eight hundred stadia.
Of this land, then, of which I have spoken, the greater part, as the priests said and it also seemed to me, was an addition made by the Egyptians. For between the mountains which I have mentioned, lying above the city of Memphis, the space between seemed to me to have once been a gulf of the sea, just as the regions about Ilion and Teuthrania and Ephesus and the plain of the Maeander, to compare these small things with great; for of the rivers which brought down the stuff to make these lands, none is worthy to be compared in volume with one of the mouths of the Nile, which has five mouths. There are also other rivers, not in size at all equal to the Nile, which have had great effects; of these I can mention the names of several, and especially the Achelous, which, flowing through Acarnania and so issuing out into the sea, has already made half of the Echinades islands mainland.
There is, indeed, a region of Arabia, not far from Egypt, a gulf of the sea extending from the so-called Red Sea, long and narrow in such a way as I shall describe: the length of the voyage, starting from the innermost part, to sail out to the open sea, takes forty days with a rowing ship; and the width, where the gulf is widest, is half a day's sail. There is shallowness and ebb tide in it throughout the day. I think that there was once such a gulf in Egypt as well, the one extending from the northern sea towards Ethiopia, and the Arabian one, which I am about to describe, extending from the southern sea towards Syria, almost meeting each other at their innermost parts, but deviating slightly from the land. So if the Nile were willing to divert its stream into this Arabian gulf, what would prevent it from being filled up within twenty thousand years? For I, indeed, hope that it could even be filled up within ten thousand years: for why, indeed, in the time that has passed before I was born, would not a gulf, even much larger than this one, be filled up by such a river and one so industrious?
As for the things concerning Egypt, then, I am persuaded by those who say them, and I myself also think it to be so, having seen Egypt lying before the adjacent land and shells appearing on the mountains, and salt growing up, so that even the pyramids are shown, and only this mountain of Egypt above Memphis having sand, and neither resembling the neighboring land, neither the Arabian land adjoining Egypt nor Libya, nor even Syria (for the Syrians inhabit the parts by the sea of Arabia), but having black and crumbling soil, so that it is both mud and an outpouring from Ethiopia, having been washed down by the river. And we know that Libya has redder and sandier soil, and Arabia and Syria have more clayey and rocky soil.
The priests also told me this as a great proof concerning this land: that during the reign of King Moeris, when the river rose to the minimum of eight cubits, it watered Egypt below Memphis; and it was not yet nine hundred years since Moeris had died when I heard these things from the priests. Now, however, if the river does not rise to at least sixteen or fifteen cubits, it does not overflow into the land. It seems to me that the Egyptians who live below the lake of Moeris, both the other regions and the so-called Delta, if this land continues to rise in height and give a similar increase in growth, without being flooded by the Nile for all the remaining time, will suffer what the Egyptians themselves once said the Greeks would suffer. For they learned that the whole land of the Greeks is watered by rain, but not irrigated by rivers as their own land is, and they said that the Greeks, having been deceived by great hope, would suffer badly from famine. This saying wants to mean that if the god does not wish to rain on them but to afflict them with drought, the Greeks will be seized by famine; for they have no other means of water at all, except from Zeus alone.
And indeed, these things have been rightly said about the Greeks by the Egyptians. But now, let me also tell the Egyptians themselves how it is: if, as I said before, the land below Memphis (for this is the land that is growing) continues to rise in height according to the course of time, will not the Egyptians living there suffer from hunger? For neither will their land be rained upon, nor will the river be able to overflow into their fields. For indeed, now these people gather the fruit of the earth with the least labor of all men, both the other Egyptians and the rest of mankind: they have no labors, neither breaking up furrows with the plow, nor hoeing, nor doing any other work that other men do concerning the harvest, but when the river comes of its own accord and waters their fields, and having watered them, departs again, then each man sows his own field and sends swine into it, and when he has trodden the seed into the ground with the swine, he waits for the harvest, and when he has threshed the corn with the swine, he gathers it in this way.
If, then, we desire to use the opinions of the Ionians concerning Egypt, who say that only the Delta is Egypt, speaking of it as extending from the Watchtower of Perseus along the sea to the Salters' of Pelusium, which is forty schoeni, and from the sea inland to the city of Cercasorus, where the Nile divides and flows to Pelusium and Canobus, and the rest of Egypt they say is part of Libya and Arabia, we could show by this argument that the Egyptians have no land. For indeed, the Delta, as the Egyptians themselves say and as I also think, is alluvial and has only recently, so to speak, come to light. If, then, there was no land for them, what were they doing, thinking they were the first people on earth? They should not have gone to the test of the children, to find out which language they would first speak. But I do not think that the Egyptians came into existence at the same time as the Delta, which is called by the Ionians, but have always existed since the human race began, and as the land grew, many of them were left behind and many went down. So, the Thebes of Egypt was once called, the circumference of which is twenty and one hundred and six thousand stadia.
If, then, we correctly understand them, the Ionians do not think rightly about Egypt. But if the opinion of the Ionians is correct, I show that the Greeks and the Ionians themselves do not know how to reckon, who say that there are three parts of all the earth, Europe and Asia and Libya. For indeed, they must add a fourth part to their reckoning for the Delta of Egypt, if it is neither of Asia nor of Libya. For certainly, the Nile is not the river that separates Asia from Libya according to this account, but the Nile breaks around the sharp point of this Delta, so that it would be between Asia and Libya.
And we leave the opinion of the Ionians aside, and we speak thus about these matters: all of Egypt to be this land inhabited by Egyptians, just as Cilicia is the land inhabited by Cilicians and Assyria by Assyrians, and we know no boundary between Asia and Libya in a straight account except the borders of Egypt. And if we use the belief held by the Greeks, we consider all of Egypt, beginning from the Cataracts and the city of Elephantine, to be divided in two and to belong to both of the eponymous regions: for some parts of it are of Libya and others of Asia. For indeed, the Nile, beginning from the Cataracts, flows through the middle of Egypt, splitting it into the sea. Up to now, the Nile flows as one river up to the city of Cercasorus, but from this city, it divides into three paths. And one of them turns towards the east, which is called the Pelusian mouth, and the other of the paths goes towards the west: and this is called the Canobic mouth. And the straight path of the Nile is this: being carried from above to the sharp point of the Delta, it arrives, and from this point, splitting through the middle of the Delta, it goes out into the sea, providing neither the smallest portion of water to this nor the least famous: this is called the Sebennytic mouth. And there are also other bifurcated mouths separated from the Sebennytic, carrying into the sea: these have the following names, one of them the Saïtic and the other the Mendesian. And the Bolbitine mouth and the Bucolic are not natural mouths but dug.
And indeed, the oracle of Ammon bears witness to my opinion that Egypt is as extensive as I demonstrate in my account, and it came to be after I had formed my own opinion about Egypt. For those from the city of Marea and Apis, dwelling in the parts of Egypt bordering Libya, thinking themselves to be Libyans and not Egyptians, and being troubled by the religious customs concerning the sacred rites, wishing not to abstain from female cows, they sent to Ammon, saying that they had nothing in common with the Egyptians: for they dwell outside the Delta and do not agree with them, and they desire to be allowed to partake of all things. But the god did not allow them to do these things, saying that Egypt is this land which the Nile, coming upon it, waters, and that these people are Egyptians who dwell below the city of Elephantine, drinking from this river. Thus, the oracle responded to them in this way.
The Nile, when it floods, overflows not only the Delta but also the areas called Libyan and Arabian, at times reaching as far as a two days' journey on either side, and even more or less than this. About the nature of the river, however, I was unable to learn anything from either the priests or anyone else. I was eager to learn from them why the Nile, beginning to flood from the summer solstice, increases for a hundred days, and then, having reached this number of days, recedes, leaving the riverbed, so that it remains low throughout the entire winter until the summer solstice again. Concerning these matters, I was unable to obtain any information from any of the Egyptians, as they themselves were inquiring about the nature of the Nile, which is the opposite of other rivers. Desiring to know these things that have been said, I was investigating not only why it is the only river among all rivers that does not produce breezes when it blows, but also why it behaves differently from all other rivers.
However, some Greeks, desiring to become famous for their wisdom, have spoken of three different theories concerning this water: of these, I do not even deem it worthy to mention the two theories, except to indicate that I only wish to point them out. The other theory says that the Etesian winds are the cause of the river's flooding, as they prevent the Nile from flowing into the sea. But there have been times when the Etesian winds did not blow, and the Nile still behaves the same way. Moreover, if the Etesian winds were the cause, it would be necessary for the other rivers, which flow against the Etesian winds, to suffer in the same way and at the same time as the Nile, and even more so, to the extent that they are smaller and provide weaker currents. However, there are many rivers in Syria and many in Libya, which do not suffer anything like what the Nile does.
The other theory, indeed less knowledgeable than the one mentioned, but to speak in words, more wondrous: it says that the river, flowing from the Ocean, contrives these things, and the Ocean flows around the whole earth.
The third of the ways, being by far the most reasonable, is most mistaken: for indeed this one says nothing, claiming that the Nile flows from melting snow; which flows indeed from Libya through the middle of the Ethiopians, and issues forth into Egypt. How then could it flow from snow, flowing from the hottest places into the much colder? For a man to reason about such things, as it is not fitting for it to flow from snow, first and foremost the winds that blow from these regions are hot: secondly, the land is rainless and frostless, and it is necessary for snow falling to rain within five days, so that if it snowed, it would rain in these lands: thirdly, the people being black from the heat. And kites and swallows being there throughout the year do not leave, and cranes fleeing the winter that occurs in the Scythian land go to winter in these places. Therefore, if it snowed even as much as in this land through which it flows and from which it begins to flow, the Nile, none of these things would be, as necessity proves.
But the one who spoke about the Ocean, having carried the story into obscurity, does not have a refutation: for I indeed do not know any river being the Ocean, but I think that Homer or some of the earlier poets, having found the name, brought it into their poetry.
But if it is necessary for me, having criticized the opinions put forth, to accept my own opinion about the unclear matters, I will explain through what reason the Nile seems to me to increase in the summer: the sun, driving away the winter season, comes from the ancient passage under the storms to the upper parts of Libya. Now, to show in the smallest way, everything has been said: for this god would be in the closest region and in whichever way, this land would suffer from thirst for water most of all and the local streams of the rivers would dry up.
But to explain in greater detail, it is as follows: when the sun passes through the upper parts of Libya, it does these things: as the air is always clear in these regions, the land being warm and the winds cool, the sun does what it does in the summer when it goes through the middle of the sky: it draws the water to itself, and having drawn it, it pushes it away to the upper regions, and the winds catch it and scatter it, causing it to evaporate. And the winds that blow from this region, the south and the southwest, are the rainiest of all the winds. But it seems to me that the sun does not send away all the water of the Nile each year, but some remains around itself. And as the winter becomes milder, the sun goes back to the middle of the sky, and from there it draws water from all the rivers equally. And while the other rivers, having much rainwater mixed with them, flow greatly, as the land is both wet and eroded, in the summer, the rains failing them and being drawn by the sun, they are weak. But the Nile, being without rain, and being drawn by the sun alone of all the rivers at this time, naturally flows much less than in the summer: for then it is drawn equally with all the waters, but in the winter it is pressed alone.
Thus, I consider the sun to be the cause of these things. And the same sun, in my opinion, also causes the dry air in this region, heating its own passage: thus, it always occupies the upper parts of Libya during summer. But if the positions of the seasons were to change, and the north wind and winter were to stand where now the south wind and midday are, and the south wind where now the north wind is, if these things were so, the sun, being driven away from the middle of the sky by the winter and the north wind, would go to the upper parts of Europe just as it now comes to Libya, and passing through all of Europe, I expect it would make the Ister River do what the Nile does now.
Concerning the wind, that it does not blow, I hold this opinion: that from very hot regions, it is not the nature of anything to blow, but the wind loves to blow from some cold place.
Let these things now be as they are and as they were at the beginning: concerning the sources of the Nile, neither Egyptians nor Libyans nor Greeks who came to me in conversation undertook to know, except in Egypt in the city of Saïs, the scribe of the sacred treasures of Athena. This man seemed to me to be joking, saying he knew exactly: he said thus, there are two mountains with sharp peaks, situated between the city of Syene of Thebaid and Elephantine, and the names of the mountains are Crophi and Mophi: from these mountains, the sources of the Nile, being bottomless, flow, and half of the water flows towards Egypt and the north wind, the other half towards Ethiopia and the south. As for the springs being bottomless, he said that Psammetichus, the king of Egypt, came to test this: for he had a rope of many thousands of fathoms' length lowered down and could not reach the bottom. Thus, indeed, the scribe, if he was telling the truth about these things, seemed to me to indicate that there are strong whirlpools here and a backflow, and as the water is thrown against the mountains, the rope, being lowered, cannot go down to the bottom.
But of no one else was I able to learn anything. However, I did my best to inquire as far as possible, going as far as the city of Elephantine as an eyewitness, and from there on, I am reporting what I heard. From the city of Elephantine, going up, there is a rising land: in this place, then, it is necessary for the boat to be tied on both sides, like an ox, and to be led. But if the boat breaks loose, it is carried away by the force of the stream. This place is a journey of four days, and in this place, the Nile is winding, like the Maeander: and there are twelve schoeni which must be sailed through in this manner. And then you will come to a level plain, in which the Nile flows around an island: its name is Tachompso. And from Elephantine up, Ethiopians already inhabit the land, and half of the island, while Egyptians inhabit the other half. Near the island, there is a large lake, around which nomadic Ethiopians graze: having sailed through this, you will come to the stream of the Nile, which flows into this lake. And then, having disembarked from the river, you will make a journey of forty days: for sharp rocks rise in the Nile, and there are many reefs, through which it is not possible to sail. But having passed through this place in forty days, you will embark again on another boat, and in twelve days, you will arrive at a large city, the name of which is Meroe: this city is said to be the metropolis of the other Ethiopians. And in this place, they worship only Zeus and Dionysus, and they greatly honor these gods, and there is an oracle of Zeus established among them: they go to war when and where this god commands them through his oracles.
From this city, sailing for an equal amount of time as from Elephantine to the Ethiopian capital, you will arrive at the land of the Deserters. These Deserters are called Asmakh, which in the Greek language means "those who stand on the left hand of the king." They were once 240,000 Egyptian soldiers who rebelled and joined these Ethiopians for the following reason. During the reign of King Psammetichus, there were watchposts established at Elephantine facing Ethiopia, at Daphnae of Pelusium facing Arabia and Assyria, and at Marea facing Libya. Even in my time, the Persians maintain these posts in the same manner as they were during Psammetichus' reign, with guards stationed at Elephantine and Daphnae. So, the Egyptian soldiers, having been on guard for three years without being relieved, decided and agreed together to rebel against Psammetichus and went to Ethiopia. When Psammetichus learned of this, he pursued them. But when he caught up with them, he pleaded with them, saying many things and not allowing them to leave behind their ancestral gods, children, and wives. One of them, it is said, took hold of his genitals and said that wherever this was, there they would have children and wives. When they arrived in Ethiopia, they offered themselves to the Ethiopian king, who in return gave them land in exchange for driving out certain feuding Ethiopians. When these people settled among the Ethiopians, they made the Ethiopians more civilized, having learned Egyptian customs.
Until now, the Nile is known for a distance of four months' travel by water and land, besides the part that flows in Egypt: for so many months are found to be spent by one traveling from Elephantine to these Deserters. And it flows from the west and the setting of the sun. But from this point, no one is able to speak clearly: for this land is desolate because of the heat.
But these things I heard from men of Cyrene, who said they went to the oracle of Ammon and came to speak with Etearchus, the king of the Ammonians, and somehow from other conversations they came to talk about the Nile, how no one knows its sources, and Etearchus said that Nasamonian men once came to him. This nation is indeed Libyan, and they inhabit the Syrtis and the land towards the east of the Syrtis not very far. And when the Nasamonians arrived and were asked if they had anything more to say about the deserts of Libya, they said that among them were born the sons of powerful men, who were very insolent, and when they came of age, they planned many things and especially they drew lots to send five of themselves to see the deserts of Libya, and if they saw anything more than those who had seen the farthest. For of Libya, along the northern sea, starting from Egypt, as far as the headland of Soloeis, which is the end of Libya, many Libyans and many Libyan nations live, except as much as the Greeks and Phoenicians possess: but above the sea and the people who live by the sea, Libya is full of wild beasts; and above the wild beasts, there is sand, terribly waterless and desolate of all things. So they said that the young men, sent away by their peers, with water and food well prepared, went first through the inhabited land, and having passed through this, they came to the land of wild beasts, and from there they went through the desert, making their way towards the west wind, and having passed through a great sandy area in many days, they saw at last trees growing in a plain, and they approached them and tried to take the fruit that was on the trees, and as they tried, small men came upon them, much smaller than average men, and they took them and led them away. Neither could the Nasamonians understand any of the language of these men, nor could those who led the Nasamonians understand the Nasamonians. And they led them through very large marshes, and having passed through these, they came to a city in which all the people were equal in size to those who led them, and they were black in color. And by the city flowed a great river, and it flowed from the west towards the rising sun, and crocodiles were seen in it.
Indeed, the account of Etearchus of Ammon has been made clear to me, except that he said the Nasamonians returned, as the men of Cyrene reported, and that all the people they encountered were wizards. Now, Etearchus also agreed that this river flowing by was the Nile, and indeed, the account takes it so. For the Nile flows from Libya and cuts through the middle of Libya, and as I compare the visible things, inferring the unknown from them, it starts from the same measures as the Ister. For the Ister River, beginning from the Celts and the city of Pyrene, flows through the middle, splitting Europe: and the Celts are outside the Pillars of Heracles, and they border the Cynesii, who dwell at the westernmost part of those who live in Europe: and the Ister ends, flowing into the sea, the Euxine Sea, through all of Europe, where the Milesian colonists inhabit Istria.
Indeed, the Ister River is well-known, for it flows through inhabited areas, but concerning the sources of the Nile, no one is able to speak; for the part of Libya through which it flows is uninhabited and deserted. Concerning its course, as far as it was possible to learn, it has been said: and it flows out into Egypt. Now, Egypt lies mostly opposite to the mountainous Cilicia; from there, it is a five-day journey in a straight path for a man without burden to Sinope on the Euxine Sea. And Sinope lies opposite to where the Ister flows out into the sea. Thus, I think the Nile, running through all of Libya, is made equal to the Ister.
Let these things about the Nile be said: I now turn to Egypt, lengthening the account, because it has the most wonders of any other country and provides works greater in speech compared to every country, for which reason more will be said about it. The Egyptians, along with the sky being different for them and the river providing a different nature than the other rivers, have established for the most part all customs and laws opposite to the other people: among these, the women go to the market and trade, while the men, being at home, weave. Indeed, the others weave pushing the woof upwards, but the Egyptians push it downwards. The men carry the loads on their heads, while the women carry them on their shoulders. The women urinate standing up, while the men do so sitting down. They use the toilet in their houses, but they eat outside in the streets, saying that the shameful but necessary things must be done in private, while the not shameful things can be done openly. No woman is dedicated to any male god or female goddess, but men are dedicated to all and every one. There is no need for the sons to support their parents if they do not want to, but there is every need for the daughters to do so even if they are unwilling.
The priests of the gods, in other places, have long hair, but in Egypt, they shave. For other people, it is customary to shave their heads when they are in mourning, but the Egyptians let their hair and beard grow on their heads and faces during times of death, having been previously shaved. For other people, their way of life is separate from animals, but for the Egyptians, their way of life is together with animals. They live on grains other than wheat and barley, but for the Egyptians, it is a great disgrace to live on food made from these grains; instead, they make their food from coarse grains, which they call spelt. They knead dough with their feet, but they mix clay with their hands, and they gather dung. Other people leave their genitals as they were born, except for those who have learned from the Egyptians, but the Egyptians practice circumcision. Each man has two garments, but each woman has one. For the sails of ships, other people attach the ropes and sheets outside, but the Egyptians attach them inside. The Greeks write and calculate with pebbles, moving their hand from the left to the right, but the Egyptians do so from the right to the left; and while doing this, they themselves say that they are writing towards the right, but the Greeks are writing towards the left. They use two kinds of writing: some of their writing is called sacred, and some is called demotic.
Being exceedingly religious, more than all other people, they use such customs. They drink from bronze cups, cleaning them every day, not some but all. They always wear freshly washed linen garments, practicing this especially, and they circumcise their genitals for the sake of cleanliness, preferring to be clean rather than more presentable. The priests shave their entire body every third day, so that neither lice nor any other filthy thing may come upon them while they serve the gods. The priests wear only linen garments and papyrus sandals: they are not allowed to take any other clothing or footwear. They wash twice each day with cold water and twice each night, and they perform countless other religious rites, so to speak. They also suffer not a few good things: for they neither wear out any of their household goods nor spend anything, but they have sacred bread made for them, and a great quantity of beef and goose meat is given to each of them every day, and grape wine is given to them: but they are not allowed to taste fish. The Egyptians neither sow beans very much in their land, nor do they eat the beans that are produced, either raw or cooked, and the priests cannot even bear to see them, considering them to be an unclean legume. There are not one but many priests for each of the gods, one of whom is the high priest: and when one dies, his son takes his place.
They believe that the male bulls are of Epaphus, and for this reason they examine them in this way: if they see even one black hair, they consider it not to be pure. One of the priests is appointed to search for this, while the animal stands upright and lies down, and having drawn out the tongue, if it is pure of the prescribed signs, which I will mention in another account: he also looks at the hairs of the tail if they have grown according to nature. If it is pure of all these things, it is marked with papyrus wrapped around the horns, and then, having molded sealing-earth, he applies the ring, and in this way they lead it away. But for the one who sacrifices an unmarked animal, the penalty of death is imposed. Now the animal is examined in this manner, and the following sacrifice has been established for them.
Having brought the marked animal to the altar where they will sacrifice, they kindle a fire, and then, having poured wine over the sacrificial animal and having called upon the god, they slaughter it; having slaughtered it, they cut off the head. Indeed, they skin the body of the animal, and having cursed the head greatly, they carry it away; if there is a market and Greek traders are present, they carry it to the market and sell it; if there are no Greeks present, they throw it into the river. And they curse the heads, saying that if any evil is about to happen to those who sacrifice or to all of Egypt, it should turn to this head. Now, according to their customs, all Egyptians use the same practice regarding the heads of the sacrificed animals and the pouring of the wine for all the sacred rites, and from this custom, no Egyptian will taste the head of any living creature.
The removal indeed of the insides and the burning of the sacrificial animals is different for each temple, and it has been established for them: the greatest goddess they consider to be and the greatest festival they perform, this I come to speak of... When they skin the bull, having prayed, they remove the entire stomach from what they took, but they leave its internal organs in the body and the fat, and they cut off the legs and the end of the loin and the shoulders and the neck. Having done these things, they fill the rest of the bull's body with pure bread and honey and raisins and figs and frankincense and myrrh and the other offerings, and having filled it with these things, they burn it, pouring an abundant amount of oil: having fasted beforehand, they sacrifice, and while the sacrificial animals are burning, they all beat themselves, and when they have finished mourning, they set forth a meal from the remaining parts of the sacrificial animals.
Now all the Egyptians sacrifice unblemished bulls and bull-calves, but they are not allowed to sacrifice cows, for they are sacred to Isis. For the statue of Isis, being a woman, has cow-like horns, just as the Greeks depict Io, and all Egyptians equally revere female cows, far more than all other animals. For this reason, neither an Egyptian man nor a woman would kiss a Greek man with their mouth, nor would they use a knife, spit, or cauldron of a Greek man, nor would they taste the flesh of a clean bull cut with a Greek knife. They bury the dead cattle in this manner: they cast the cows into the river, but they bury the bulls, each in their suburbs, with one or both horns protruding as a sign. And when the appointed time comes and the carcass decays, a boat comes to each city from the island called Prosopitis, which is in the Delta and has a circumference of nine schoeni. On this island of Prosopitis, there are many other cities, but the boats come from one city to collect the bones of the bulls, the name of the city being Atarbekhis, and in it a holy temple of Aphrodite has been established. From this city, many people wander to other cities, and having dug up the bones, they carry them away and bury them all in one place. And they bury the other animals that die in the same way, for even these they do not kill.
All those who have established a temple of Zeus of Thebes or belong to the Theban district, these now all abstaining from sheep, sacrifice goats. For indeed, not all Egyptians equally revere the same gods, except for Isis and Osiris, whom they say is Dionysus: all equally revere these. And all those who have established a temple of Mendes or belong to the Mendesian district, these abstaining from goats, sacrifice sheep. The Thebans now and all those who through them abstain from sheep, say that this custom has been established for them for these reasons. Heracles desired greatly to see Zeus, and Zeus did not want to be seen by him: finally, since Heracles persisted, Zeus devised this: having skinned a ram, he cut off its head and, wearing its fleece, thus showed himself to him. From this, the Egyptians make the image of Zeus with a ram's face, and from the Egyptians, the Ammonians, being colonists of both Egyptians and Ethiopians and considering a language between both. It seems to me that the Ammonians made their name from this: for the Egyptians call Zeus "Amoun." The Thebans, however, do not sacrifice rams, but they are sacred to them for this reason. On one day of the year, during the festival of Zeus, having cut up and skinned one ram, they dress the image of Zeus in the same way, and then they bring another image of Heracles near it. Having done these things, all those around the temple beat the ram and then bury it in a sacred tomb.
Regarding Heracles, I heard this account, that he was one of the twelve gods: but concerning the other Heracles, whom the Greeks know, I was not able anywhere in Egypt to hear. And indeed, that the Egyptians did not receive the name of Heracles from the Greeks, but rather the Greeks from the Egyptians and these Greeks who gave the name Heracles to the son of Amphitryon, there are to me many other proofs that this is so, and among them also this, that both the parents of this Heracles, Amphitryon and Alcmene, were of Egyptian descent, and that the Egyptians do not say they know the names of Poseidon and the Dioscuri, nor are these gods reckoned among the other gods for them. And indeed, if they had received from the Greeks the name of any deity, of these they would least of all have been likely to remember, if indeed at that time they made use of ships and there were some Greeks who were seafarers, as I both hope and in my opinion judge: so that the Egyptians would have been much more likely to know the names of these gods than the name of Heracles. But there is an ancient god for the Egyptians who is Heracles: and as they themselves say, it is seventeen thousand years to the reign of Amasis since the twelve gods, of whom they count Heracles as one, came into being from the eight gods.
And wanting indeed to know something clear about these matters, from which it was possible, I sailed also to Tyre of Phoenicia, inquiring there to be a sacred temple of Heracles. And I saw it richly adorned with many other offerings, and in it were two pillars, one indeed of gold having been worn away, the other of emerald stone shining in the nights in size. And having come to words with the priests of the god, I asked how much time it was since their temple was founded. And I found that not even these agreed with the Greeks: for they said that at the same time as Tyre was being settled, the temple of the god was founded, and it was years since they inhabited Tyre, three hundred and two thousand. And I saw in Tyre also another temple of Heracles having the name of Thasian to be. And I came also to Thasos, in which I found a temple of Heracles founded by Phoenicians, who having sailed forth in search of Europe, founded Thasos: and these things are five generations of men earlier than Heracles the son of Amphitryon to have been born in Hellas. Now the things having been researched show clearly an ancient god Heracles to be, and they seem to me to be doing most correctly of the Greeks, who having founded two Heracles, hold them in honor, and to the one indeed as an immortal they sacrifice with the name Olympian, and to the other as a hero they perform rites.
The Greeks say many other things thoughtlessly, and among them is this tale about Heracles: they say that when he arrived in Egypt, the Egyptians crowned him and led him in a procession to be sacrificed to Zeus. And while he was quiet at first, when they began the sacrifice at the altar, he turned to fight and killed them all. To me, it seems that the Greeks who tell this story are completely ignorant of the nature and customs of the Egyptians. For the Egyptians are not even allowed to sacrifice animals, except for pigs, male bulls, and unblemished calves, and geese; how then could they sacrifice humans? And furthermore, with Heracles being just one man, and still a human, as they say, how could he possibly kill so many thousands? And concerning these matters, let us speak thus, and may there be goodwill towards us from both the gods and the heroes.
But indeed the goats and the male goats, for these reasons, the Egyptians mentioned do not sacrifice: the Mendesians consider Pan to be one of the eight gods, and they say that these eight gods came into being before the twelve gods. And indeed, the painters and the sculptors draw and carve the image of Pan with the face of a goat and the legs of a male goat, just as the Greeks do, not thinking that he is such, but similar to the other gods: but for what reason they draw him like this, it is not more pleasant for me to say. The Mendesians, however, revere all the goats, and even more the males than the females, and of these, the goatherds have greater honors: and from these, one especially, when it dies, a great mourning is established for the whole Mendesian region. And both the male goat and Pan are called Mendes in Egyptian. And this portent happened in this region during my time: a male goat openly mated with a woman, and this reached the acceptance of people.
The Egyptians indeed consider the pig to be an unclean animal, and if any of them should touch one, passing by them in their clothes, they go and immerse themselves in the river, having dipped themselves in it. And the swineherds, being native Egyptians, do not enter any temple in Egypt, alone of all people, and no one is willing to give a daughter to them or to take one from them, but the swineherds give and take in marriage from each other. The Egyptians do not think it right to sacrifice pigs to any other gods, but only to the Moon and Dionysus, at the same time, during the full moon, having sacrificed the pigs, they eat the meat. And why they have abominated pigs in other festivals but sacrifice them in this one, there is a story told by the Egyptians, but for me, knowing it, it is not more fitting to tell. And this sacrifice of the pigs to the Moon is performed: when they have sacrificed, having put together the tip of the tail and the spleen and the caul, they cover them with all the fat of the animal that is around the belly, and then they burn it. And they eat the other meat during the full moon when they sacrifice the sacred animals, but on another day, they would not yet taste it. And the poor among them, because of the weakness of their livelihood, having made pig-shaped loaves and roasted them, sacrifice these.
During the feast of Dionysus, at the evening celebration, each person offers a piglet, slaughtering it in front of their doors and giving it to the one who sold it among the swineherds to take away. The rest of the festival for Dionysus, the Egyptians celebrate almost entirely the same as the Greeks, except for the dances. Instead of phalluses, they have devised other things for themselves, nearly two-foot-tall statues moved by strings, which the women carry around the villages, nodding the genitalia, which is not much smaller than the rest of the body. A flute-player leads, and the women follow, singing songs about Dionysus. As for why the genitalia is larger and moves alone of the body, there is a sacred story told about it.
So now, it seems to me that Melampus, the son of Amytheon, was not ignorant of this sacrifice, but rather experienced. For indeed, Melampus is the one who explained to the Greeks the name of Dionysus, the sacrifice, and the procession of the phallus. He did not fully grasp the story, but those who came after him, the wise men, explained it more thoroughly. Therefore, the phallus sent to Dionysus is the one introduced by Melampus, and from this, the Greeks learned and practiced what they practice. Now, I say that Melampus, being a wise man, established prophecy for himself and, having learned from Egypt, explained many other things to the Greeks, as well as those concerning Dionysus, changing only a few of them. For I will not say that what is done in Egypt for the god and what is done among the Greeks happened to coincide. For they would be similar to the Greeks and not recently introduced. Nor will I say how the Egyptians received from the Greeks either this or any other custom. But it seems to me that Melampus learned the most about Dionysus from Cadmus, the Tyrian, and those who came with him from Phoenicia to the land now called Boeotia.
Indeed, nearly all the names of the gods have come to Greece from Egypt. For I find, upon inquiry, that they have come from foreign lands, and I believe that they have come especially from Egypt. For except for Poseidon and the Dioscuri, as I have mentioned before, and Hera and Hestia and Themis and the Graces and the Nereids, the names of all the other gods have always been in the land of the Egyptians. I say what the Egyptians themselves say. But the names of the gods which they say they do not know, these, I think, were named by the Pelasgians, except for Poseidon; for they learned about this god from the Libyans. For no people have had the name of Poseidon from the beginning except the Libyans, and they have always honored this god. The Egyptians, then, do not pay tribute to heroes at all.
These things, then, and others besides these, which I will mention, the Greeks have learned from the Egyptians. But the erect phalluses of the statues of Hermes, they have not learned from the Egyptians, but from the Pelasgians, first of all the Athenians among all the Greeks, having received them, and from these, the others. For the Pelasgians were already living together with the Athenians at that time as Greeks, from where also the Greeks began to be considered. And whoever has been initiated into the mysteries of the Cabeiri, which the Samothracians perform, having received them from the Pelasgians, this man knows what I say. For the Samothracian land was inhabited by these Pelasgians, who later became residents with the Athenians, and from these, the Samothracians receive the mysteries. Therefore, the Athenians, first of the Greeks, having learned from the Pelasgians, made the statues of Hermes with erect phalluses. And the Pelasgians spoke some sacred story about this, which is revealed in the mysteries in Samothrace.
In the past, the Pelasgians used to sacrifice to the gods, praying without giving any name or title to any of them, as I know from what I heard in Dodona. For they had not yet heard any names. And they named the gods, calling them from such a thing, because having set everything in order and holding all arrangements, they had the world. Then, after a long time had passed, they learned the names of the other gods, which came from Egypt, and much later, they learned the name of Dionysus. And after some time, they inquired about the names at the oracle in Dodona. For this oracle was considered the oldest of the oracles among the Greeks, and it was the only one at that time. So when the Pelasgians inquired in Dodona whether they should adopt the names that had come from the barbarians, the oracle allowed them to use them. From that time on, they sacrificed using the names of the gods, and later, the Greeks received them from the Pelasgians.
From there, each of the gods came into being, whether they always existed, and what sort of forms they had, was not known until, so to speak, the day before yesterday. For I think that Hesiod and Homer were older than me by four hundred years and not more: these are the ones who made the theogony for the Greeks and gave the gods their names and distributed honors and arts to them and indicated their forms. But the poets who are said to have been born before these men, in my opinion, were born later. The first of these things the priestesses of Dodona say, and the later things that concern Hesiod and Homer, I say.
Concerning the oracles both in Greece and in Libya, the Egyptians tell the following story. The priests of the Theban Zeus said that two women who were priestesses were taken away from Thebes by Phoenicians, and that one of them they learned was sold into Libya, and the other into the Greeks. These women, they said, were the ones who first established the oracles in the aforementioned nations. When I asked them from where they knew this so accurately, they said in response that a great search had been made by them for these women, and that they were not able to find them, but later they learned these things about them, which indeed they were saying.
I heard these things indeed from the priests in Thebes, and the prophetesses of Dodona say these things: two black doves having flown from Thebes of the Egyptians, the one of them to arrive in Libya and the other among them, and sitting on an oak tree, it spoke with a human voice that it was necessary for an oracle of Zeus to be established there, and they themselves to understand that the announced thing was divine, and from this they made it. And the dove that went to the Libyans, they say, commanded the Libyans to make an oracle of Ammon: and this too is of Zeus. And the priestesses of Dodona, of whom the oldest was named Promeneia, and after her Timarete, and of the youngest Nicandra, they said these things: and the other Dodonaeans who were around the temple agreed with them.
And I hold this opinion concerning them: if indeed the Phoenicians carried away the sacred women and gave one of them to Libya and the other to Greece, it seems to me that this woman of the now Greece, formerly called Pelasgia of the same, was sold to the Thesprotians, and then, being a slave there, she established a sanctuary of Zeus under a growing oak tree, just as she had been serving a sanctuary of Zeus in Thebes, where she arrived, she has a memory of it there: and from this, she began divination, after she learned the Greek language: and she said that her sister was sold in Libya by the same Phoenicians by whom she herself was sold.
It seems to me that the women were called "doves" by the people of Dodona because they were foreigners and their speech seemed to them like the sounds of birds. But after some time, they say that the dove began to speak with a human voice, once the woman had learned to speak their language. Until then, as she spoke in a foreign tongue, it seemed to them that her voice was like that of a bird, for how could a dove speak with a human voice? By saying that the dove was black, they indicate that the woman was Egyptian. The divination practices in both Thebes of Egypt and Dodona happen to be very similar to each other. Moreover, the practice of divination through sacred animals also originated from Egypt.
Indeed, the Egyptians were the first among men to establish festivals, processions, and religious offerings, and from them, the Greeks have learned. And as evidence for this, the following: for the Egyptian ceremonies appear to have been performed for a long time, while the Greek ones were created recently.
The Egyptians hold gatherings not only once a year, but frequent gatherings. Most of all and most eagerly, they celebrate in the city of Bubastis for Artemis, secondly in the city of Busiris for Isis: for in this city indeed is the greatest temple of Isis, and this city is founded in the middle of Egypt in the Delta. Isis is Demeter in the language of the Greeks. Thirdly, they celebrate in the city of Saïs for Athena, fourthly in the city of Heliopolis for the Sun, fifthly in the city of Buto for Leto, and sixthly in the city of Papremis for Ares.
Now when they travel to the city of Bubastis, they do such things. For indeed, they sail together, men with women, and a great multitude of both in each boat. Some of the women, having rattles, make noise with them, while others play flutes throughout the journey, and the remaining women and men sing and clap their hands. And when they sail by another city, having brought the boat to the land, they do such things: some of the women do what I have said, while others mock and shout at the women in that city, some dance, and others lift up their skirts while standing. They do this by every riverside city. And when they arrive at Bubastis, they celebrate with great sacrifices, and more grape wine is consumed at this festival than in the entire remaining year. They have intercourse, whatever man and woman there is, except for children, and up to seventy myriads, as the locals say.
These things indeed are done in this way, and in the city of Busiris, as they celebrate the festival of Isis, it has been mentioned before by me: for indeed, after the sacrifice, all men and women are struck, very many myriads of people: but whom they strike, it is not pious for me to say. And as many Carians as there are dwelling in Egypt, these do even more than these things, by as much as they also cut their foreheads with knives, and by this they are clearly foreigners and not Egyptians.
But when they gather in the city of Sais, on the night of the sacrifice, they all light many lamps in the open air around their houses: and the lamps are saucers full of salt and oil, and on top of them is the wick, and this burns all night, and the festival is called the Feast of Lamps. And those Egyptians who do not come to this assembly, keeping the night of the sacrifice, they also all light the lamps, and thus it is not only in Sais that they burn, but also throughout all Egypt. And for what reason this night has obtained light and honor, there is a sacred story told about it.
But when they go to the city of the Sun and Buto, they only perform sacrifices. In Papremis, they perform sacrifices and sacred rites just like in other places. However, when the sun sets, a few priests remain near the statue, while most of them stand at the entrance of the temple holding wooden clubs. Over a thousand men, who have made vows and also carry wooden clubs, gather in front of the temple. The day before, the priests move the statue, which is inside a small gilded wooden shrine, to another sacred building. A few priests who remain with the statue pull a four-wheeled wagon carrying the shrine and the statue inside it. The other priests stand in front of the temple doors, not allowing them to enter, while the men who made vows support the god and fight against the defending priests. A fierce battle with clubs takes place, resulting in many head injuries and possibly even deaths, although the Egyptians claim that nobody dies. The locals say that this custom started because of a story involving Ares, the god of war. Ares' mother lived in this temple, and he was raised separately from her. When he grew up, Ares wanted to visit his mother, but her attendants didn't recognize him and refused to let him pass. So, Ares brought men from another town to overpower the attendants and see his mother. They believe that this story is the reason why the fighting with clubs became a tradition during the festival.
And not to engage in sexual activities with women in temples nor to enter temples unwashed after such activities with women, these are the first to have established as religious rules. For almost all other people, except the Egyptians and Greeks, engage in sexual activities in temples and enter temples unwashed after being with women, considering humans to be like other animals in this regard: for they see other animals and species of birds mating in both the temples of the gods and in the sacred precincts: if, therefore, this was not pleasing to the god, the animals would not do it. These, then, are the things that they say, doing practices that are not pleasing to me.
The Egyptians, indeed, are very religious in all matters concerning the temples and especially in these. Egypt, being adjacent to Libya, is not very full of wild animals; but all the animals that they have are considered sacred, some living with humans and some not. For the sake of which I would speak of the sacred animals, I would descend in my account to divine matters, which I most avoid speaking of; but having touched upon them, I spoke, being necessarily caught up. There is a law concerning the animals thus: caretakers have been assigned for the food separately for each, both males and females of the Egyptians, for whom the son receives the honor from the father. And those in each city fulfill these vows for themselves: praying to the god to whom the animal belongs, shaving the heads of the children either all or half or a third part of the head, they stand at a balance with silver for the hair; and whatever it draws, this they give to the caretaker of the animals, who in return for it, cutting up fish, provides food for the animals. Such food, indeed, has been assigned to them: but if anyone kills any of these animals, if willingly, death is the penalty, if unwillingly, he pays a penalty, whatever the priests assign. And whoever kills an ibis or a hawk, whether willingly or unwillingly, must die.
There are indeed many domestic animals, and there would be even more if it were not for the following behavior of cats: when the females give birth, they no longer mate with the males, who, seeking to mate with them, cannot. In response to this, they devise the following scheme: they snatch the kittens from the females and, lifting them up, kill them, but after killing them, they do not eat them. The females, deprived of their offspring and desiring others, thus come to the males; for the animal is fond of its young. When a fire occurs, divine events seize the cats: the Egyptians, standing apart, guard the cats, neglecting to extinguish the burning, while the cats, slipping through and leaping over the people, throw themselves into the fire. When this happens, great grief seizes the Egyptians. In whichever houses a cat dies of natural causes, all the residents shave only their eyebrows, but in whichever houses a dog dies, they shave their whole body and head.
When cats die, they are taken to sacred buildings, where they are embalmed and buried in the city of Bubastis. Each person buries the dogs in their own city in sacred tombs. In the same way, the mongooses are buried. The shrewmice and hawks are taken to the city of Buto, while the ibises are taken to the city of Hermes. The bears, being rare, and the wolves, not much larger than foxes, are buried wherever they are found lying.
The nature of crocodiles is as follows: for four winter months, they eat nothing, and being four-footed, they are both land and water creatures. For they lay eggs in the ground and hatch them, and they spend most of the day on dry land, but the entire night in the river, for the water is warmer than the air and the dew. Of all the mortal creatures we know, this one grows from the smallest to the largest: for it lays eggs not much larger than those of geese, and the young are proportionate to the eggs, but as they grow, they become as long as seventeen cubits and even larger. They have eyes like pigs, and teeth large and protruding in proportion to their body. They are the only animals that have no tongue, nor do they move their lower jaw, but they alone among animals bring their upper jaw to the lower. They also have strong claws and an unbreakable scaly skin on their back. They are blind in water, but in the open air, they have the sharpest vision. Since they live in water, their mouths are full of leeches inside. All other birds and animals avoid them, but the sandpiper is at peace with them, as it benefits from them: for when the crocodile comes out of the water onto the land and then opens its mouth (for it is accustomed to do this, facing the west wind), the sandpiper enters its mouth and swallows the leeches; the crocodile, being benefited, is pleased and does not harm the sandpiper.
To some of the Egyptians, indeed, the crocodiles are sacred, but to others, not so, but they treat them as enemies. Those who live around Thebes and Lake Moeris hold them in great reverence as sacred: and from all, each of them raises a crocodile, having trained it to be tame, and they put glass and gold ornaments into its ears and bracelets around its front legs, and they give it set-aside food and offerings, and they take the best care of it while it is alive. But when it dies, they embalm it and bury it in sacred tombs. Those who live around the city of Elephantine, however, eat them, not considering them to be sacred. They are called not crocodiles but "khampsae": but the Ionians named them crocodiles, likening their appearance to the crocodiles which are among them in their walls.
There are many and various hunts for them, but the one which, in my opinion, is most worthy of being reported, I write. When a hunter baits a hook with the back of a pig and casts it into the middle of the river, he himself, holding a live piglet on the edge of the river, strikes it. Hearing the sound, the crocodile goes towards the voice, and encountering the bait, swallows it; then they pull it. When it is drawn out onto the land, first of all, the hunter covers its eyes with mud; having done this, he very easily handles the rest, but if he does not do this, it is with difficulty.
The river horses in the region of Papremis are considered sacred, but not to the other Egyptians. They have a nature of such appearance: they are four-footed, with split hooves like cattle, a blunt nose, a mane like a horse, showing tusks, a tail and voice of a horse, and as large as the greatest bull. Their skin is so thick that, when dried, it can be made into spear shafts.
And there are also otters in the river, which they consider to be sacred. They also believe that of the fish, the so-called scale-fish and the eel are sacred, and they say that these are sacred to the Nile, and of the birds, the fox-geese.
There is also another sacred bird, to which the name phoenix is given. I myself have not seen it except in so far as it is represented in pictures; for indeed it is a rare visitor to the land, appearing, as the people of Heliopolis say, only once in five hundred years, when it comes at the death of its parent. And if the picture is like the reality, it is of such and such a size and appearance: its plumage is partly golden and partly red, and it is most similar to an eagle in shape and size. They say that this bird contrives the following, which to me seems incredible: that it flies from Arabia to the temple of the Sun, carrying its parent encased in myrrh, and buries it in the temple of the Sun; and it carries it thus: first, it molds an egg of myrrh as large as it can carry, and then it tests itself carrying it, and when it has tested itself, it then hollows out the egg and places its parent inside it, and fills in the hollow with more myrrh, so that it has placed its parent in the hollow of the egg; and with the parent inside, it becomes the same weight as before; and having molded it, it carries it to the temple of the Sun in Egypt. This is what they say this bird does.
There are, near Thebes, sacred snakes, in no way harmful to humans, which, being small in size, bear two horns grown from the top of their heads. These, when they die, are buried in the temple of Zeus, for they say that they are sacred to this god.
There is, indeed, a place in Arabia near the city of Buto, lying mostly there, and to this place I went, inquiring about the winged serpents. And arriving, I saw bones of serpents and spines in such a multitude that it is impossible to describe, and there were heaps of spines, both large and smaller than these, and even many of these. And this place is such, in which the spines are scattered, a narrow entrance from steep mountains into a great plain, and this plain adjoins the Egyptian plain. And there is a story that, together with the spring, winged serpents fly from Arabia towards Egypt, but the ibis birds, meeting them at the entrance of this place, do not let the serpents pass but kill them. And for this work, the Arabians say that the ibis is greatly honored by the Egyptians; and the Egyptians also agree that they honor these birds for this reason.
The appearance of the ibis is as follows: it is entirely black, with legs like a crane, and a face that is very hooked, and its size is as much as a landrail. Now, the appearance of the black ones that fight against the serpents is this, but the ones that are more accustomed to the company of humans (for there are indeed two kinds of ibises) have a completely bare head and neck, and they are white in feathers except for the head, neck, wingtips, and the end of the tail (all these parts I mentioned are extremely black), and their legs and face are similar to the other kind. The form of the serpent is like that of water snakes, and it does not bear feathered wings but rather wings that are most similar to those of a bat. Let this much be said about these sacred animals.
Of the Egyptians themselves, those who dwell around the cultivated Egypt, they are most diligent in preserving the memory of the past and are the most learned in history of all the people I have encountered. They live in this manner: they purge themselves for three consecutive days each month, seeking health through vomiting and enemas, believing that all diseases come from the food they consume. For apart from the Libyans, the Egyptians are the healthiest of all people, which I think is due to the unchanging seasons; for the changes in seasons are what cause the most illnesses for people, both in general and especially in the seasons themselves. They eat bread made from spelt, which they call "cyllestis." They drink a beverage made from barley, for they do not have vines in their land. Of fish, they eat those that are sun-dried and raw, and those that are preserved in brine. Of birds, they eat quails, ducks, and small birds, raw after being salted. All other kinds of birds and fish that they have, except for those that are considered sacred by them, they eat roasted and boiled.
In their gatherings of the wealthy, when they have finished dining, a man carries around a corpse in a wooden coffin, made to resemble as closely as possible both in painting and in work, of a size about one or two cubits long. Showing it to each of the guests, he says, "Looking at this, drink and be merry, for when you die, you will be like this." They do this at their feasts.
Following the customs of their ancestors and adopting no others, the Egyptians have many remarkable practices, including a song called Linus, which is also sung in Phoenicia, Cyprus, and elsewhere. Although it has different names among the nations, it is the same song that the Greeks sing and call Linus. This makes me wonder about many things concerning Egypt, including where they got the name Linus. It seems that they have always sung this song, but in Egyptian, Linus is called Maneros. The Egyptians told me that Maneros was the only child of their first king, who died young. They honored him with these lamentations, and this song was their first and only one.
The Egyptians also share this custom with the Lacedaemonians alone among the Greeks: when their younger men encounter their elders, they yield the way and turn aside, and rise from their seats when they approach. However, this is not shared with any other Greeks: instead of addressing each other in the streets, they bow down, lowering their hand to their knee.
They wear linen tunics with fringes around the legs, called "calasiris," and over these, they put on loose white woolen garments. However, they do not bring woolen garments into the temples nor do they bury them with these; for it is not sacred. They agree with those called Orphic and Bacchic, but they are Egyptian and Pythagorean: for it is not sacred for those participating in these rites to be buried in woolen garments. There is a sacred story told about this.
And these other things are discovered by the Egyptians: both the months and each day belong to which god, and on each day, the person born will encounter which fate, and how they will end, and what kind of person they will be. And the Greek poets who came into being used this. And more omens are found for them than for all other people: for when an omen occurs, they guard it by writing down the outcome, and if ever later something similar to this happens, they believe it will turn out the same way.
Divination among them is arranged in this way: the art is not attached to any human, but to the gods they share with others: for there is an oracle of Heracles there, and of Apollo, and of Athena, and of Artemis, and of Ares, and of Zeus, and they hold in the highest honor of all the oracles, that of Leto is in the city of Buto. However, the oracles for them do not stand in the same way, but they are different.
The medical practice among them is arranged in this way: each physician is for one disease and not for more. There are many physicians: some are established as eye doctors, some as head doctors, some as tooth doctors, some as those for the stomach, and some as those for the hidden diseases.
And the lamentations and burials among them are these: when a person of some account dies from among their households, the entire female sex from these households, having smeared their head or face with mud, then leaving the corpse in the house, they themselves go about the city, beating themselves, wearing their clothes fastened up, and showing their breasts, and with them all their female relatives; and on the other side, the men too, wearing their clothes fastened up, beat themselves. And after they have done these things, thus they carry the body to the embalming.
There are those who dwell in this land and possess this art. These people, when a corpse is brought to them, show wooden models of the dead to those who brought it, skillfully painted... and they say that the most elaborate of their methods is that of one whose name I think it impious to mention in such a matter, and they show a second method which is less elaborate and less expensive than the first, and a third which is the least expensive of all. Having explained these options, they ask the family which method they wish to have the corpse prepared. The family, having agreed on a price, leave, and those who remain behind in the house perform the most elaborate embalming as follows. First, they draw out the brain through the nostrils with an iron hook, partly extracting it in this manner, and partly pouring in drugs. Then, having made an incision in the side with a sharp Ethiopian stone, they remove all the intestines, and having cleaned the belly and rinsed it with palm wine, they again rinse it with ground spices. Afterward, they fill the cavity with pure ground myrrh, cassia, and other spices, except for frankincense, and sew it up again. Having done this, they preserve the body in natron for seventy days; it is not permitted to embalm it for a longer time. When the seventy days have passed, they wash the body and wrap the whole of it in linen bandages, anointing it with gum, which the Egyptians mostly use instead of glue. Then, the relatives receive the body, and they make a wooden figure in the shape of a man, and having made it, they enclose the corpse, and having shut it up in this manner, they store it in a sepulchral chamber, setting it upright against the wall.
Thus, indeed, they prepare the dead with the most expensive methods, but for those who desire the middle way and avoid the extravagance, they prepare them in this manner: when they fill the syringes with the oil made from cedar, in which they filled the cavity of the dead, neither cutting it open nor removing the intestines, but having inserted it through the seat and having taken hold of the enema of the rear passage, they embalm for the appointed days, and on the last day they let out from the cavity the cedar oil which they had put in earlier. This has such power that it brings out with itself the intestines and the internal organs, having dissolved them: the natron dissolves the flesh, and indeed only the skin and the bones of the dead remain. And when they have done these things, they return the dead as they were given, without any further treatment.
The third embalming method is this, which prepares those with less wealth: having cleansed the cavity with a syringe, they preserve it for seventy days, and then they return it from where it was given.
The wives of the prominent men, when they die, are not given to be embalmed immediately, nor those women who are very beautiful and of greater reputation: but when they become third or fourth day, then they are handed over to the embalmers. They do this for this reason, so that the embalmers do not have intercourse with the women: for they say that someone was caught having intercourse with a recently deceased woman, and his fellow worker reported him.
Whoever, either of the Egyptians themselves or of foreigners, is similarly seized by a crocodile or by the river itself appears to have died, according to whichever city he is carried out, it is necessary for all to embalm him and wrap him as beautifully as possible and bury him in sacred coffins: it is not allowed for anyone else to touch him, neither of the relatives nor of the friends, but the priests themselves of the Nile, treating him as something more than a dead man, bury him.
But to the Greeks, they avoid using customs, and to say the whole, neither of other men anywhere. Now the other Egyptians guard this thus, there is a city Chemmis, great of the Theban district near the New City: in this city there is a square temple of Perseus the son of Danae, around which palm trees have grown. And the gates of the temple are very large stone: and upon them stand two great stone statues. And in this enclosed temple there is a shrine and an image standing in it of Perseus. These Chemmites say that Perseus often appears to them on the land and often within the temple, and his sandal having been worn is found to be two cubits in size, which when it appears, all Egypt prospers. These things they say, and they do these Greek things for Perseus: they establish a gymnastic contest having a contest in every kind, offering prizes of cattle and cloaks and skins. And when I asked them why Perseus appeared to them alone and why, having separated from the other Egyptians, they established a gymnastic contest, they said that Perseus was born from their city: for Danaus and Lynceus being Chemmites sailed to Greece, and from these, tracing their genealogy, they went down to Perseus. And they said that he came to Egypt for the reason that the Greeks also say, carrying the Gorgon's head from Libya, and he came to them and recognized all his relatives: and having learned the name of Chemmis from his mother, he came to Egypt. And they said that he ordered them to perform the gymnastic contest.
All these things the Egyptians who dwell above the marshes hold to: but those who have their dwellings in the marshes use the same customs as the other Egyptians, both in other matters and also in that each man has one wife only, like the Greeks; but for economy in respect of their food these have discovered the following contrivances:—when the river is full and has flooded the plains, there grow in the water great numbers of lilies, which the Egyptians call lotus; these they cut with a sickle and dry in the sun, and then they pound that which grows in the middle of the lotus and which is like the head of a poppy, and they make of it loaves baked by the fire. The root also of this lotus is edible and has a rather sweet taste: it is round in shape and about the size of an apple. There are other lilies too, like roses, which also grow in the river, and from them the fruit is produced in a separate vessel springing from the root by the side of the plant itself, and very nearly resembles a wasp's comb: in this there grows a large number of seeds of the size of an olive-stone, and they are eaten either fresh or dried. Of the byblus which grows annually and is cut, they make their boats in the following manner:—when they have taken out the marrow of the upper part, they cut the rest of it, which is left, into pieces and interweave them and then make their boats, allowing the ends to stick up; and having done so they set them out to dry in the sun, and then they use them to sail down the river, and they have one steering-oar, which is passed through the bottom of the boat; and these boats are used for carrying cargo and are broken up afterwards. And some of them live on nothing else but the fish which they catch and have dried in the sun, after having taken out the entrails, and then when they have dried them, they use them for food.
The fish that swim in groups are not born much in the rivers, but being nurtured in the lakes, they do the following. When the desire to breed seizes them, they swim out to the sea in groups, with the males leading and releasing their sperm, and the females following and swallowing it and becoming pregnant. And when they become full in the sea, they swim back to their own haunts, each one, but no longer do the same ones lead, but the leadership is held by the females: and leading in groups they do just as the males did: for they release the eggs in small amounts, and the males following swallow them. And these eggs are fish. And from the remaining eggs which are not swallowed, the fish which are nurtured grow. And those of them which are caught while swimming out to the sea, appear bruised on the left side of their heads, and those which are caught while swimming back, on the right side. And they suffer this because of the following reason: clinging to the land they swim down to the sea on the left side, and swimming back again they cling to the same side, rubbing against it and touching it as much as possible, so that they may not miss the way because of the stream. And when the Nile begins to rise, the hollow places of the land and the marshes which are by the river are the first to begin to fill with water as it soaks through from the river: and as soon as these become full, they are filled at once with small fish. And whence the race of these is born, I think that I understand this: when the Nile has gone down in the previous year, the fish which have been left behind in the mud with the last of the water lay eggs; and when the water comes back again in the following year, from these eggs at once are born the fish of which I speak.
And concerning the fish, it is thus. The Egyptians who dwell around the marshes use oil from the fruit of the castor-oil plant, which the Egyptians call kiki, and they make it in this way. They sow these castor-oil plants along the edges of both the rivers and the lakes, which grow wild in Greece: these, when sown in Egypt, bear much fruit, but with a bad smell. When they have gathered this, some cut and press it, while others roast and boil it, and they collect the liquid that flows from it. It is drinkable and no less suitable for the lamp than olive oil, but it has a heavy smell.
And concerning the mosquitoes being abundant, these things are devised for them. For those dwelling in the upper parts of the marshes, the towers are helpful, as they climb up and sleep: for the mosquitoes are not able to fly high because of the winds. And for those dwelling around the marshes, these other things are devised instead of the towers: every man of them possesses a fishing net, with which he catches fish during the day, and at night he uses it in this way: he lies down in the bed, sets up the fishing net around it, and then, having put it on, he sleeps. And the mosquitoes, if one sleeps wrapped in a garment or a sheet, bite through these, but through the net they do not even attempt at all.
The cargo boats they use are made from acacia wood, which is most similar in shape to the lotus of Cyrene, and its sap is gum. From this acacia, then, they cut logs as long as two cubits and lay them like bricks, constructing the boat in this manner: they wind the two-cubit logs around closely set and long stakes. And when they have built the boat in this way, they stretch crossbeams over them; they use no ribs; and they caulk the seams from the inside with byblus. They make one steering oar, and this passes through the bottom of the boat. They use an acacia mast and byblus sails. These boats cannot sail up the river unless a bright wind blows, but they are towed from the land; and they are carried downstream in this way: there is a door made of tamarisk, fastened together with a mat of reeds, and a pierced stone weighing two talents at most: of these, they let the door, tied to a rope, be carried in front of the boat, and the stone by another rope behind. The door, then, as the current rushes in, moves quickly and pulls the "baris" (for this is the name of these boats), while the stone being dragged behind and lying in the mud directs the course. There are many of these boats in number, and some carry many thousands of talents.
But when the Nile comes upon the land, the cities alone appear to stand out, most resembling the islands in the Aegean Sea; for the rest of Egypt becomes a sea, and only the cities stand out. So then, when this happens, they no longer travel along the streams of the river, but through the middle of the plain. Indeed, for one sailing up to Memphis from Naucratis, the voyage takes place near the pyramids themselves: yet this is not the case, but rather it goes by the sharp point of the Delta and by the city of Cercasorus. And to Naucratis, sailing from the sea and Canobus through the plain, you will arrive at the city of Anthylla and the one called Arkhandrus.
Of these, indeed, Anthylla being a notable city is set apart for providing shoes for the wife of the ever-reigning king of Egypt (and this has been the case since Egypt has been under the Persians), while the other city seems to me to have its name from Arkhandrus, the son-in-law of Danaus, the son of Phthius the Achaean; for it is indeed called the city of Arkhandrus. There might be another Arkhandrus, however, the name is not of Egyptian origin.
Up to this point, my vision and opinion and history speaking these things are, but from here on, I come to the Egyptians' words, saying according to what I heard: and there will be added to them something of my own vision. Min, the first king of Egypt, the priests said, indeed dammed off Memphis. For the river flowed entirely along the sandy mountain towards Libya, and Min, from above, as much as a hundred stadia from Memphis, having added a bend towards the south, dried up the ancient stream and made the river flow in the middle of the mountains. And even now, this bend of the Nile under the Persians, as having been dammed off, flows in great watchfulness, being guarded every year: for if the river should wish to break through and flow over here, there is danger that all Memphis would be flooded. And as for this Min, the first king, having made the dammed off part dry, in it he founded this city which is now called Memphis: for Memphis too is in the narrow part of Egypt: and outside of it, he dug a lake from the river towards the north and towards the west (for the Nile itself dams off towards the east), and he established the temple of Hephaestus in it, being both great and most worthy of mention.
After this one, the priests recounted from a papyrus scroll the names of three hundred and thirty other kings. In so many generations of people, eighteen were Ethiopians, one was a native woman, and the rest were Egyptian men. The name of the woman who ruled was Nitocris, the same as the Babylonian princess. They said she sought revenge for her brother, whom the Egyptians had killed while he was ruling over them, and having killed him, they handed over the kingship to her. To avenge her brother, she destroyed many Egyptians by deceit. For she had built a long underground chamber, new in appearance, but with another purpose in mind. She invited the Egyptians, whom she knew to be most responsible for the murder, to a grand feast, and while they were feasting, she let the river in through a hidden, large pipe. They told me so much about her, except that after accomplishing this, she threw herself into a room full of ashes, so that she might not go unpunished.
Of the other kings, for they did not speak of any demonstration of deeds nor anything of brilliance, except for one of the last of them, Moeris: this one they remembered for the memorials of Hephaestus, the northern entrance having been built, and also having dug a lake, the circuit of which I will show later in terms of stadia, and having built pyramids in it, of which I will mention together with the lake concerning their size: this one they remembered for so many things, but of the others, none for anything.
Skipping over these kings, then, to the one who became king after them, whose name was Sesostris, I will make mention of him: the priests said that first, he set out with long ships from the Arabian Gulf and subjugated those who lived by the Red Sea, until he came to a sea no longer navigable because of shallows. From there, when he returned to Egypt, according to the priests' account, he gathered a large army and led it through the mainland, conquering every nation that stood in his way. When he encountered brave and fiercely resisting people fighting for their freedom, he set up pillars in their lands with inscriptions stating his name and his country, and how by his own power he had conquered them. But when he took cities without a fight and easily, he inscribed on the pillars the same things as for the brave nations, and also added drawings of female private parts, wanting to make it clear that they were cowardly.
Doing these things, he went through the mainland, until from Asia he crossed into Europe and subdued both the Scythians and the Thracians. To these, it seems to me, the Egyptian army arrived first: for in their land, the pillars are seen standing, but beyond them, no longer. From there, turning back, he went, and when he came to the Phasis river, I cannot say for certain whether it was King Sesostris himself who, having divided a portion of his army, left them as inhabitants of the land, or whether some of the soldiers, tired of his wandering, stayed by the Phasis river.
For the Colchians appear to be Egyptians, having noticed this myself before hearing it from others. And as it came to my mind, I asked both, and the Colchians remembered the Egyptians more than the Egyptians remembered the Colchians; but the Egyptians said they considered the Colchians to be of Sesostris' army. And I myself guessed this, and that they are dark-skinned and woolly-haired. And this indeed amounts to nothing, for there are others such as these; but rather, more so because of this, that alone of all people, Colchians and Egyptians and Ethiopians circumcise their private parts from the beginning. And the Phoenicians and the Syrians in Palestine also confess to having learned from the Egyptians, and the Syrians around the Thermodon and Parthenius rivers and the Macrones, who are neighbors to these, say they have recently learned from the Colchians. For these are the only people who are circumcised among men, and these appear to do the same as the Egyptians. But of the Egyptians and Ethiopians, I do not have to say which learned from the other, for it appears to be something ancient. And as they mingled with Egypt, this great evidence also comes to me: as many Phoenicians as mingle with Greece no longer imitate the Egyptians in their private parts. But they do not circumcise the private parts of those who come after.
Now let me also say another thing about the Colchians, as they are similar to the Egyptians: these people and the Egyptians alone work with linen and in the same way, and their whole way of life and their language are similar to each other. But the Colchian linen is called "Sardonian" by the Greeks, while the one coming from Egypt is called "Egyptian."
The pillars which the Egyptian king Sesostris set up in the various countries are mostly no longer visible, but in the Palestine region of Syria, I myself saw them still standing with the inscriptions mentioned and the private parts of women depicted. And there are also two images of this man carved into rocks in Ionia, one on the road from Ephesus to Phocaea, and the other on the road from Sardis to Smyrna. On both sides, a man is engraved with a size of five cubits, holding a spear in his right hand and a bow in his left, and the rest of the equipment likewise; for he has both Egyptian and Ethiopian attire. And from one shoulder to the other shoulder across the chest, sacred Egyptian characters are inscribed, saying the following: "I myself acquired this land with my own shoulders." Who he is and from where, he does not reveal here, but he has made it known elsewhere. Indeed, those who have seen these images after others think that he is Memnon, being far removed from the truth.
This Egyptian Sesostris, indeed, returning and leading many people of the nations whose lands he had ravaged, the priests said, when he was being brought back to Daphnae of Pelusium, his own brother, to whom Sesostris entrusted Egypt, invited him for hospitality and to surround his sons outside the house with wood, and having surrounded them, to set fire. And when he learned this, he immediately consulted his wife; for indeed, he also brought his wife with him; and she advised him, of the six sons, to stretch out two upon the fire and to bridge over the burning, and for them to step upon them and save themselves. Sesostris did these things, and indeed two of the sons were burned in such a manner, but the remaining ones were saved together with their father.
And Sesostris, having returned to Egypt and avenged his brother, employed the multitude he had brought with him from the countries he had devastated in the following manner: these were the ones who dragged the stones that were brought for this king to the temple of Hephaestus, being of great length and size; and these, being compelled, dug all the canals that now exist in Egypt, and unwillingly made Egypt, which was previously suitable for horses and carts, lacking in these. For from this time, Egypt, being all flat land, has become without horses and carts: and the causes of this are the canals, which are many and have various forms. And the king cut up the land for this reason: as many of the Egyptians as did not possess their cities on the river but in the middle, these, when the river went away, being in want of water, used the drink that was broader, drawing from wells.
For these reasons, indeed, Egypt was divided. And the king, I said, distributed the land to all the Egyptians, giving an equal square portion to each, and from this made their revenues, commanding a tribute to be paid annually. And if any man's land were taken away by the river, he would come to him and signify what had happened; and the king would send those who would inspect and measure how much less the land had become, so that for the rest he might pay the appointed tribute according to the proportion. And it seems to me that from this practice, geometry was found and came into Greece; for indeed, the Greeks learned the sunclock, sundial, and the twelve divisions of the day from the Babylonians.
This king indeed, the only Egyptian ruler of Ethiopia, left behind memorials in front of the temple of Hephaestus: stone statues, two of thirty cubits, of himself and his wife, and of his four sons, each twenty cubits. Now, the priest of Hephaestus, much later in time, did not allow Darius the Persian to set up a statue in front, saying that works had not been accomplished by him such as those by Sesostris the Egyptian: for Sesostris had subdued other nations no less than him, and indeed also the Scythians, but Darius had not been able to conquer the Scythians. Therefore, it was not just for him to set up a statue in front of those offerings of Sesostris, not surpassing him in deeds. They say that Darius, in response to this, forgave the priest.
When Sesostris died, they said that his son Pheros inherited the kingship, who did not engage in any military campaign, but it happened to him to become blind because of the following event. When the river went down to its greatest extent, at that time to eighteen cubits, as it overflowed the fields, a wind fell upon it and the river became full of waves. They say that this king, acting recklessly, took a spear and threw it into the middle of the whirlpools of the river, and immediately after this he suffered in his eyes and became blind. For ten years, indeed, he was blind, but in the eleventh year, an oracle arrived for him from the city of Buto, saying that the time of his punishment had come to an end, and he would regain his sight by washing his eyes with the urine of a woman who had been with her husband alone, being inexperienced with other men. And he first tried his own wife, but when he did not recover, he tried one after another of all the others. When he regained his sight, he gathered together the women of whom he had made trial, except for the one with whose urine he had regained his sight, into one city, which is now called Red Clay. Having gathered them together into this city, he burned them all together with the city itself. But the one with whose urine he had regained his sight, he kept as his wife. And having escaped the suffering of his eyes, he dedicated offerings in all the sacred places that were worthy of mention, and especially worthy of mention is the offering he dedicated in the temple of the Sun, which were works worthy of admiration: two stone obelisks, each made from one stone, each one hundred cubits in length and eight cubits in width.
They said that this man from Memphis inherited the kingship, whose name in the language of the Greeks is Proteus: now there is a very beautiful and well-furnished temple precinct in Memphis, lying to the south wind of the Hephaestian. And Phoenicians from Tyre dwell around this precinct, and this whole place is called the Camp of the Tyrians. And in the temple precinct of Proteus, there is a temple called the temple of the Foreign Aphrodite: I conjecture that this temple is of Helen, daughter of Tyndareus, and having heard the story that Helen was entertained by Proteus, and indeed also that the Foreign Aphrodite is the namesake: for as many other temples of Aphrodite there are, none of them is called by the name of the Foreign Aphrodite.
The priests told me, as I inquired about Helen, that it happened thus: Alexandrus, having seized Helen, sailed away from Sparta to his own land; and as he was in the Aegean, winds drove him out and cast him into the Egyptian sea, and from there, for the winds did not let up, he came to Egypt and to the now-called Canobic mouth of the Nile and to the Salters'. There was on the coast what is now a temple of Heracles, to which if any man's servant takes refuge and has sacred marks set upon him, giving himself to the god, it is not lawful to lay hands on him. This law has continued unchanged from the beginning down to my time. So then the servants of Alexandrus, distrusting him, learned about the law concerning the temple and became suppliants of the god, accusing Alexandrus and telling the whole story of Helen and the wrong done to Menelaus; and they accused him both to the priests and to the guardian of this mouth, whose name was Thonis.
Upon hearing these things, Thonis swiftly sent a message to Proteus in Memphis, saying the following: "A foreigner has come, of Teucrian race, having committed an unholy deed in Hellas: for he has deceived his own guest and brought this woman, and many great possessions, driven by the winds to this land. So then, shall we allow this man to sail away unharmed, or shall we take away the things he has brought?" In response to this, Proteus sent back the following message: "Seize this man, whoever he is, who has committed unholy deeds against his own guest, and bring him to me, so that I may know what he will say."
Upon hearing these things, Thonis captured Alexandrus and detained his ships, and then brought him, Helen, the wealth, and the temple refugees to Memphis. When they all arrived, Proteus asked Alexandrus who he was and from where he sailed. He then recounted his lineage and the name of his homeland, and also explained the voyage from where he sailed. After that, Proteus asked him from where he had taken Helen; but as Alexandrus was wandering in his speech and not telling the truth, the temple refugees who had come with him refuted him, explaining the whole story of the wrongdoing. Finally, Proteus revealed this judgment to them, saying that "If I did not consider it of great importance not to kill any strangers, as many as have already been carried away by the winds and have come to my land, I would have punished you on behalf of the Greek, who, O most wicked of men, having received hospitality, committed the most unholy deed: you came to take the wife of your own guest. And indeed, these things were not enough for you, but having persuaded her, you go away, having stolen her. And not even these things alone were enough for you, but you also come, having plundered the house of the guest. Now then, since I consider it of great importance not to kill strangers, I will not allow you to take away this woman and the wealth, but I myself will guard them for the Greek guest, until he himself comes and wishes to take them away; but I order you and your fellow sailors to depart from my land to some other place within three days, or else, as enemies, you will be surrounded."
The priests said that this was how Helen came to be with Proteus. It seems to me that Homer also knew this story, but since it was not as fitting for his epic poetry as the other one he used, he willingly left it out, showing that he was aware of this story as well. Indeed, he made it clear in the Iliad (and nowhere else did he contradict himself) the wandering of Alexandrus, as he was carried away with Helen and wandered to other places, and how he arrived at Sidon in Phoenicia. He recalls this in the story of Diomedes' Prowess, and the verses go like this: "There were the embroidered robes, the work of women of Sidon, which godlike Alexandrus himself brought from Sidon, sailing over the wide sea, on the journey when he brought high-born Helen." He also recalls it in the Odyssey in these verses: "Such drugs did the daughter of Zeus have, clever ones, good ones, which Polydamna, the wife of Thon, an Egyptian, gave her; in that land the most fertile soil bears many drugs, many good ones mixed in, and many harmful ones." And in these other verses, Menelaus speaks to Telemachus: "The gods held me back in Egypt, eager as I was to return, because I had not offered them perfect hecatombs." In these verses, he shows that he knew of Alexandrus' wandering to Egypt; for Syria borders Egypt, and the Phoenicians, of whom Sidon is a part, dwell in Syria.
According to these words and this passage, not least but most of all, it demonstrates that the Cyprian verses are not of Homer but of someone else. For in the Cyprian poems it is said that on the third day from Sparta, Alexandrus arrived in Ilion, bringing Helen, having used a favorable wind and a calm sea. But in the Iliad, it is said that he wandered off course while bringing her.
Now then, let Homer and the Cyprian verses be favored. But when I asked the priests whether the Greeks speak in vain about the events around Ilion or not, they said these things in response, claiming to know from the history of Menelaus himself. For after the abduction of Helen, a large army of Greeks came to the Teucrian land to help Menelaus; and when they disembarked on the land and established their army, they sent messengers to Ilion, and Menelaus himself went with them. And when they entered the wall, they demanded Helen and the property that Alexandrus had stolen from Menelaus, and they asked for justice for the wrongs; but the Teucrians then and afterwards spoke the same words, swearing and protesting, that they did not have Helen nor the property claimed, but that all these things were in Egypt, and they themselves could not justly bear the penalties for what Proteus, the Egyptian king, had. But the Greeks, seeming to be mocked by them, besieged them in this way until they took it: and when they captured the wall, as Helen did not appear, but they learned the same story as before, thus the Greeks, believing the first story, sent Menelaus himself to Proteus.
And Menelaus, arriving in Egypt and sailing up to Memphis, spoke the truth of the matters, and he encountered great hospitality and received Helen unharmed from evils, and also all his possessions. However, having obtained these things, Menelaus became an unjust man towards the Egyptians. For when he was eager to sail away, unfavorable winds held him back; and since this situation persisted for a long time, he contrived an unholy deed: taking two children of local men, he made them sacrifices. And after he became notorious for having done this deed, being hated and pursued, he fled with his ships towards Libya; and from there, the Egyptians could not say where he went. They said that they knew these things from inquiries, but they were certain about the events that happened among themselves, speaking without falsehood.
These things the Egyptian priests said: and I myself also add to the account concerning Helen, saying these things, if indeed Helen was in Ilium, she would have been given back to the Greeks, either willingly or unwillingly by Alexandrus. For indeed, Priam was not so mad, nor were the others related to him, that they wished to risk their own bodies and their children and the city, so that Alexandrus might live with Helen. And if indeed they knew these things in the first times, since many of the other Trojans, whenever they mingled with the Greeks, perished, and of Priam himself there is not a time when not two or three or even more of his sons died when a battle occurred, if it is necessary to use anything from the poets, and while such things were happening, I myself indeed hope, if Priam himself lived with Helen, he would have given her back to the Achaeans, intending indeed to be freed from the present evils. And indeed, the kingdom did not pass to Alexandrus, so that the affairs of old Priam were upon him, but Hector, being older and more of a man than him, was going to receive it after Priam died, who it was not fitting to entrust to his brother doing wrong, and these things happened because of great evils for him and all the other Trojans. But they did not have Helen to give back, nor did the Greeks believe the truth for them, as I myself indeed declare my opinion, the divine preparing it, so that being destroyed by complete destruction they might make this clear to the humans, that of the great wrongdoings there are also great punishments from the gods. And these things indeed seem to me to have been said.
The next to reign after Proteus (they said) was Rhampsinitus. The memorial of his name left by him was the western forecourt of the temple of Hephaestus; he set two statues here forty-one feet high; the northernmost of these the Egyptians call Summer, and the southernmost Winter; the one that they call Summer they worship and treat well, but do the opposite to the statue called Winter. This king (they told me) had great wealth in silver, so great that none of the succeeding kings could surpass or come near it. To store his treasure safely, he had a stone chamber built, one of its walls abutting on the outer side of his palace. But the builder of it shrewdly provided that one stone be so placed as to be easily removed by two men or even by one. So when the chamber was finished, the king stored his treasure in it, and as time went on, the builder, drawing near the end of his life, summoned his sons (he had two) and told them how he had provided for them, that they have an ample livelihood, by the art with which he had built the king's treasure-house; explaining clearly to them how to remove the stone, he gave the coordinates of it, and told them that by doing so, they would become the guardians of the king's wealth. After the builder died, the sons didn't wait long before going to the palace at night, finding the stone in the building easily, and taking a large amount of the treasure. When the king opened the chamber, he was astonished to see the containers of his wealth depleted, but he didn't know who to blame, as the seals on the door were intact, and the chamber was securely closed. When he opened the chamber a few more times and saw his wealth decreasing each time (since the thieves didn't stop), he decided to set a trap by placing a snare around the containers with the treasure. When the thieves came back as they had before, one of them got caught in the snare as he approached the container. Realizing the danger he was in, he immediately called his brother and told him the situation, urging him to come inside quickly and cut off his head so that he wouldn't be recognized and bring ruin to both of them. His brother agreed that this was a good idea, and after doing as asked and replacing the stone, he went back home with his brother's severed head. As day broke, the king entered the building and was astonished to see the body of the thief in the trap, headless, while the building remained undamaged, with neither an entrance nor an exit. Confused, he proceeded to do this: he hung the thief's body on the wall and stationed guards around it, ordering them to capture and bring to him anyone they saw weeping or expressing grief. However, the mother of the thief, upon seeing the body hanging, was deeply distressed: she spoke to her surviving son and ordered him to find a way to retrieve his brother's body; if he failed to comply, she threatened to go to the king and expose him as the one who possessed the treasure. As the mother harshly berated her surviving son and he was unable to convince her otherwise, he came up with the following plan: he prepared donkeys and loaded them with wine-filled skins, then began driving them. As he approached the guards watching the hanging body, he pulled the feet of two or three skins, loosening their bindings. As the wine spilled, he struck his head and shouted loudly, as if he didn't know which donkey to attend to first. The guards, seeing the wine flowing, rushed to the road with cups, eager to collect the spilled wine. The son pretended to be furious, cursing at everyone; however, as the guards tried to appease him, he feigned calming down and eventually let go of his anger, moving his donkeys out of the road and rearranging their load. As more words were exchanged and someone made him laugh, he offered the guards one of the wine skins. They laid down where they were, intending to drink, inviting him to stay and drink with them; he agreed and stayed. As they amiably engaged in drinking, he gave them another wine skin; the guards became heavily intoxicated due to the excessive wine and fell asleep right where they had been drinking. Late into the night, he cut down his brother's body, shaved the right cheek of each guard as an insult, loaded the body onto the donkeys, and drove home, fulfilling his mother's orders. When the king heard that the body of the thief had been stolen, he was greatly troubled and, wanting to find out who had done this, he took the following actions, which I do not fully believe: he made his daughter sit in a house, ordering her to receive everyone equally, and before they had relations, she had to force them to tell her the most clever and impious deed they had done in their lives. Whoever reported the events concerning the thief, she was to seize him and not let him escape. As the daughter carried out her father's orders, the thief, learning the reason for her actions, decided to outwit the king with a clever scheme: he cut off the hand of a recently deceased man at the shoulder and went to the king's daughter, carrying the hand under his cloak. When he was asked the same question as the others, he reported that the most impious deed he had committed was cutting off the head of his brother, who had been caught in a trap in the king's treasury, and the most clever deed was getting the guards drunk and taking down the hanging body of his brother. Upon hearing this, the daughter tried to seize him, but in the darkness, the thief offered her the hand of the corpse. She grabbed it, thinking it was the thief's hand, but the thief escaped through the doors. When this news reached the king, he was astonished by the man's resourcefulness and audacity, and ultimately sent a proclamation to all the cities, offering safety and a great reward to the thief if he would appear before the king. Trusting the king, the thief came to him; Rhampsinitus greatly admired him and gave his daughter to the thief in marriage, as he was the most cunning of men. He said that the Egyptians were superior to all others in cunning, and this man was superior to the Egyptians.
After these things, they said that this king went down alive to the place which the Greeks consider to be Hades, and there he played dice with Demeter, and he would win some games against her and lose others to her, and he returned again having received a golden hand towel as a gift from her. And from the descent of Rhampsinitus, they said that the Egyptians began to celebrate a festival, which I also know they still perform even in my time, although I cannot say for certain if they celebrate for this reason. On the same day, the priests weave a cloth and bind the eyes of one of their own with a headband, and having led him with the cloth to a road that goes to the temple of Demeter, they themselves depart back. And they say that this priest, with his eyes bound, is led by two wolves to the temple of Demeter, which is twenty stadia away from the city, and then again the wolves lead him back from the temple to the same place.
Let those who find such things credible use the stories told by the Egyptians; but throughout my account, it is my practice to record what is said by each people. The Egyptians claim that Demeter and Dionysus are the rulers of the underworld. They were the first to assert that the soul of a human is immortal, and that when the body perishes, it enters into another living being, always being born anew. And when it has passed through all creatures on land, sea, and air, it enters once more into a human body. They say that this cycle takes three thousand years to complete. Some Greeks have made use of this story, both earlier and later, as if it were their own invention; I know their names, but I will not write them down.
Until now, indeed, they said that in Egypt there was every good order under King Rhampsinitus and Egypt greatly prospered; but after him, King Cheops ruled them and drove them to every kind of evil. For, having closed all the temples, he first ordered them to be deprived of their sacrifices, and then he commanded all the Egyptians to work for him. Some indeed were ordered to be taken from the stone quarries in the Arabian mountain, and from there to drag stones to the Nile; and having crossed the river by boats, he ordered others to receive the stones and to drag them towards the Libyan mountain, which is called a hill. They worked in groups of a hundred thousand men, always for three months each. And it took ten years of time for the people to wear out, making the road by which they dragged the stones, which was a work not much less than the pyramid. As it seems to me: for indeed the length is five stades, the width ten orguiai, and the height, where it is highest, eight orguiai, made of polished stone and carved with animals. And so, these ten years were spent, and also for the underground chambers on the hill on which the pyramids stand, which he made as a burial place for himself in an island, having brought in a channel from the Nile. And for the pyramid itself, it took twenty years to be built: each of its four sides is eight hundred feet long and of equal height, made of polished stone and most perfectly fitted together; none of the stones are less than thirty feet in length.
The pyramid was constructed in this way: in the manner of steps, which some call crossbars and others call altars, having first made it in this way, they lifted the remaining stones with machines made of short wooden logs, lifting them from the ground onto the first row of steps; and when the stone was raised onto it, it was placed on another machine that stood on the first row, and from there it was dragged onto the second row by means of another machine; for as many rows of steps there were, there were also as many machines, or perhaps they used the same machine, being one and easily movable, which they moved to each row in turn, as they removed the stone; let it be said for both ways, as it is said. The upper parts of it were completed first, then the parts next to them were finished, and lastly, the parts on the ground and the lowest parts were completed. Egyptian writings are marked on the pyramid, showing how much was spent on radishes, onions, and garlic for the workers; and as the interpreter who explained the writings to me said, he remembered well that sixteen hundred silver talents were spent. If this is so, consider how much more was spent on iron for the workers, as well as food and clothing for the workers, during the time they were building the works mentioned, and another time, as I think, when they were cutting the stones and dragging them and working on the underground excavation, not a short time.
But Cheops came to such a state of wickedness that, being in need of money, he made his own daughter sit in a brothel and ordered her to charge a fee (the amount was not mentioned). And she, both doing the things ordered by her father and having conceived in her own mind to leave a memorial, asked each one who came to her to give her one stone as a gift for the works. And from these stones, they said that the pyramid was built, which stands in the middle of the three, opposite the great pyramid, each side of which is a whole and a half plethron.
The Egyptians said that this Cheops ruled for fifty years, and when he died, his brother Chephren succeeded to the kingship. And this man also, in the same manner as the other, both in other respects and in building a pyramid, not reaching to the measures of that: for we also measured these things, (for there are neither underground chambers, nor does a canal from the Nile come to it, flowing as in the other; but through a built passage it flows around an island, in which they say Cheops himself lies): having made the first course of Ethiopian stone of varied colors, forty feet lower in height than the other, but of the same size, he built it near the great one. And both stand on the same hill, which is raised to a height of about a hundred feet. And they said that Chephren ruled for fifty-six years.
These six and one hundred years are accounted for, in which the Egyptians experienced every kind of misery and the temples, closed for such a long time, were not opened. Out of hatred, the Egyptians do not particularly wish to name these kings, but they also call the pyramids the shepherd Philitis, who grazed his cattle in these regions during that time.
After this one, they said that Mycerinus, the son of Cheops, ruled Egypt: he, disliking his father's deeds, opened the temples and allowed the people, who were extremely miserable, to return to their work and sacrifices, and he judged them most fairly of all the kings. For this reason, they praise him most of all the Egyptian kings who have ruled so far. For not only did he judge well, but also to those who were dissatisfied with the judgment, he gave gifts from his own wealth to appease their anger. And while Mycerinus was kind to the citizens and practiced these things, the first of his misfortunes began with the death of his only daughter, who was his only child in his household. And he, grieving excessively for the loss that had befallen him, and wanting to bury his daughter more than the others, made a hollow wooden cow, and then, having gilded it, he buried her, the deceased daughter, inside it.
This cow, then, was not hidden in the earth, but even in my time, it was visible, being in the city of Saïs, lying in the royal palace in a decorated chamber: various incense offerings are made beside it every day, and every night a lamp burns all night long. Near this cow, in another chamber, stand images of the concubines of Mycerinus, as the priests in the city of Saïs said: for there stand wooden colossi, being in number about twenty at most, made naked: who these are, however, I cannot say, except for what is said.
But some say concerning this cow and the colossi this account, that Mycerinus fell in love with his own daughter and then had intercourse with her unwillingly; and after, they say that the girl hanged herself out of grief, and he buried her in this cow, and her mother cut off the hands of the attendants who had betrayed the daughter to her father, and now the images of them are in the same condition as the real women suffered. These things, however, they say while talking nonsense, as I think, both the other things and especially about the hands of the colossi: for indeed we also saw that the hands had fallen off due to time and were lying at their feet, still visible even to me.
The cow, indeed, is concealed in all other parts with a Phoenician garment, but the neck and the head appear gilded with very thick gold; and between the horns, there is a golden circle of the sun, imitated. The cow is not upright but lying on its knees, and it is as large as a very big living cow. It is brought out of the chamber every year when the Egyptians beat the god not to be named by me in such a matter: then, indeed, they also bring out the cow into the light; for they say that she, dying, asked her father Mycerinus to see the sun once in the year.
After the suffering of his daughter, this happened secondly to the king: a message came to him from an oracle in the city of Buto, saying that he would live only six years and would die in the seventh. The king, having been greatly troubled, sent a reproach to the oracle of the god, complaining that his father and uncle, having closed the temples and not remembering the gods but even destroying people, lived for a long time, while he, being pious, was going to die so soon. From the oracle, a second message came to him, saying that for this reason his life was being cut short: for it was not his duty to do what he was doing; for Egypt had to suffer for one hundred and fifty years, and the two kings before him had learned this, but he did not. Hearing this, Mycerinus, as these things were already determined, made many lamps, so that night would become day, and having lit them, he drank and enjoyed himself, not letting go of either day or night, wandering into marshes and groves, and wherever he could learn there were the most suitable places for enjoyment. He devised these things, wishing to prove the oracle false, so that twelve years would become six years, with nights made into days.
This king left behind a pyramid much smaller than his father's, each side being twenty feet shorter and three plethra in length, with a square base, and made of Ethiopian stone up to the halfway point. The Greeks who came after say that this pyramid belonged to Rhodopis, a courtesan, but they do not speak correctly. It seems to me that they do not know who Rhodopis was, for they would not have attributed to her the building of such a pyramid, which would have cost countless talents, so to speak. Moreover, Rhodopis was flourishing during the reign of Amasis, not during this king's time. For many years after these kings who left behind these pyramids, Rhodopis was of Thracian origin, and she was a slave of Iadmon, a man from Hephaestopolis of Samos, and she was a fellow slave of Aesop, the storyteller. For he too belonged to Iadmon, as was made clear in no small way: for when the Delphians often proclaimed from the oracle that whoever wished to take vengeance for the soul of Aesop should do so, no one else appeared, but another Iadmon, the son of Iadmon's son, took vengeance. Thus, Aesop also belonged to Iadmon.
Rhodopis was brought to Egypt by Xanthes of Samos, and upon her arrival, she was freed for a large sum of money by a man from Mytilene, Kharaxus, the son of Scamandronymus and brother of the poetess Sappho. Thus, Rhodopis was freed, and she remained in Egypt, becoming very charming and acquiring great wealth, as one would expect of Rhodopis, but not enough to reach such a pyramid. For one can still see the tenth part of her wealth, available to anyone who wishes, without having to attribute great wealth to her. For Rhodopis desired to leave a memorial of herself in Greece, having made this work that no one else had found and dedicated in a temple, to dedicate this as a memorial of herself at Delphi. So, having made the tenth part of her wealth into many iron beef spits, as much as the tenth part allowed her, she sent them to Delphi: these are still piled up even now, behind the altar the Chians set up, and opposite the shrine itself. Somehow, the courtesans in Naucratis love to become captivating. For this woman, about whom this story is told, became so famous that all the Greeks learned the name Rhodopis: but later than her, another woman, named Archidice, became famous throughout Greece, but less talked about than the other. And Kharaxus, having freed Rhodopis, returned to Mytilene, where Sappho criticized him much in a poem.
Now concerning Rhodopis, I have finished speaking. But after Mycerinus, the priests said that Asuchis became the king of Egypt, who made the eastern outer court of the temple of Hephaestus, being by far the most beautiful and by far the greatest; for indeed all the outer courts have carved figures and countless other aspects of building, but those especially by far. They said that during his reign, there being a great scarcity of money, a law was made for the Egyptians, showing a pledge of the father's corpse, thus to receive the loan; and to this law was added this: that the giver of the loan also held all of the borrower's burial vault, and that the one who put up this pledge had this penalty if he did not wish to repay the loan, that neither to him who died would it be allowed to have a burial, nor in that paternal tomb, nor in any other, nor to bury any other of his own offspring. And desiring to surpass this king of the earlier kings of Egypt, having made a memorial pyramid of bricks, he left it; in which there are inscriptions on a stone, saying these things: "Do not scorn me in comparison to the stone pyramids; for I surpass them as much as Zeus surpasses the other gods. For by striking with a pole into a marsh, whatever mud clung to the pole, collecting this they made bricks and in such a manner they constructed me."
After this man, so much was accomplished. And after him, a blind man from the city of Anysis became king, whose name was Anysis. During his reign, a large force of Ethiopians and Sabacos, the king of the Ethiopians, invaded Egypt. This blind man fled to the marshes, and the Ethiopian ruled Egypt for fifty years, during which he accomplished the following: whenever any of the Egyptians committed a crime, he did not want to kill any of them, but instead, he judged each one according to the magnitude of the offense, ordering them to heap up earth in front of their city, from which each of the wrongdoers came. And thus, the cities became even higher: for at first, they were heaped up by those who dug the canals during the reign of King Sesostris, and then they became very high during the Ethiopian's rule. And as other cities in Egypt became higher, it seems to me that the city of Bubastis was heaped up the most, in which there is also a most noteworthy temple of Bubastis: for indeed, other temples are larger and much more expensive, but none are more delightful to see than this one. And Bubastis, in the Greek language, is Artemis.
The sanctuary itself is thus situated: except for the entrance, the rest is an island; for channels from the Nile flow in, not mingling with one another, but each extending as far as the entrance of the temple, one flowing around it on one side, the other on the other, each a hundred feet wide and shaded by trees. The gateway has a height of ten fathoms, and it is adorned with figures six cubits high, very noteworthy. Being in the middle of the city, the temple is visible on all sides as one walks around; for as the city has been banked up to a height, while the temple has not been moved from the place where it was at first built, it is possible to look down into it. A wall with figures carved upon it runs round it, and within this enclosure there is a grove of very tall trees planted around a large shrine, in which is the image. The width and the length of the temple is a stadium every way. A road paved with stone for a length of three stadia leads to the entrance, running eastwards through the market-place towards the temple of Hermes; this road is about four hundred feet wide, and trees reaching to heaven stand on either side of it. It leads to the temple of Hermes. This temple is thus situated.
And the end of the Ethiopian's departure was said to have happened thus: he had a vision in his sleep, seeing himself fleeing, and it seemed to him that a man stood by him, advising him to gather all the priests in Egypt and cut them in half. And having seen this vision, he said that it seemed to him that the gods were showing him this as a pretext, so that, having committed sacrilege concerning the sacred things, he might receive some evil either from the gods or from men: he would not do these things, but since the time had come for him, as much as he had used, having begun to rule Egypt, he would depart. For while he was in Ethiopia, the oracles, which the Ethiopians use, had told him that he must rule Egypt for fifty years. So when this time was passing and the vision of the dream was troubling him, Sabacos willingly departed from Egypt.
As indeed the Ethiopian departed from Egypt, again the blind man began to rule, coming from the marshes, where he had spent fifty years on an island he had built with ashes and earth. For when the Egyptians brought him food, as each had been instructed, secretly from the Ethiopian, he ordered them to also bring ashes and carry them to the gift. This island, no one before Amyrtaeus was able to discover, but for more than seven hundred years, the kings before Amyrtaeus were not able to find it. The name of this island is Elbo, and its size is ten stadia in every direction.
After this one, the priest of Hephaestus ruled as king, whose name was Sethos. He, having treated the warrior Egyptians with contempt as if he would not need them at all, did dishonorable things to them, and took away their lands, which had been given to each of them as a special gift by the previous kings, twelve arouras each. Then, King Sennacherib of the Arabians and Assyrians led a great army against Egypt, and the warrior Egyptians were not willing to help. The priest, having been brought to a state of helplessness, went into the temple and lamented before the statue about the danger he was about to suffer. As he was lamenting, sleep came upon him, and it seemed to him in the vision that the god stood by him and encouraged him, saying that he would suffer no misfortune in opposing the Arabian army, for the god himself would send him helpers. Trusting these dreams, he took with him those Egyptians who were willing to follow him, and encamped at Pelusium, for this is where the entrances are. And with him, there were none of the warrior men, but rather merchants, craftsmen, and traders. When they arrived there, during the night, field mice poured over the enemies, and they ate their quivers, their bows, and the handles of their shields, so that on the next day, many of them fell naked as they fled. And now, this king stands in the temple of Hephaestus as a stone statue, holding a mouse in his hand, and the inscription on it says these words: "Let anyone who looks at me be pious."
In this part of the account, both the Egyptians and the priests spoke, showing that from the first king to this last priest of Hephaestus who ruled as king, there were three hundred and forty-one generations of men, and in these generations, there were the same number of high priests and kings. Now, three hundred generations of men are equal to ten thousand years, for three generations of men are one hundred years; and of the remaining forty-one generations, which were added to the three hundred, there are one thousand three hundred and forty years. Thus, in eleven thousand three hundred and forty years, they said that no god in human form had appeared; nor indeed had there been any such thing either before or after these kings in the rest of Egypt. In this time, they said, the sun had risen four times from where it now sets, and twice it had set where it now rises; and nothing in Egypt had been changed in this time, neither the things which come from the earth nor those which come from the river, nor those concerning diseases or deaths.
Before Hecataeus the historian, in Thebes, having genealogized himself and having traced his lineage back to the sixteenth god, the priests of Zeus made something like this also for me, not having genealogized myself: having led me into the great hall, which was inside, they counted, showing wooden colossi as many as I said. For each high priest there sets up an image of himself during his own life: so then, counting and showing, the priests showed me each one being the son of his father, going through the images from the one who had died most recently through all of them, until they had shown all of them. But to Hecataeus, having genealogized himself and having traced his lineage back to the sixteenth god, they counted in opposition to his genealogy, not accepting from him that a man was born from a god: but they counted in opposition thus, saying that each of the colossi was a Piromis born from a Piromis, until they had shown the three hundred and forty-five colossi named Piromis, and they did not trace them back to a god or a hero. And Piromis is, in the Greek language, a good and noble man.
So then, the images were already there, they showed them all being such men, far removed from gods. But before these men, they said that the gods were the rulers in Egypt, not existing together with humans, and always one of them being the one who ruled: and the last to rule was Horus, the son of Osiris, whom the Greeks call Apollo: this one, having put an end to Typhon, was the last to rule Egypt. And Osiris is Dionysus in the Greek language.
In the Greeks' belief, indeed, Heracles, Dionysus, and Pan are considered to be the youngest of the gods; but among the Egyptians, Pan is the oldest and is one of the eight first gods spoken of, Heracles is of the second group of twelve gods spoken of, and Dionysus is of the third group, who came from the twelve gods. As for the years that the Egyptians themselves say are between Heracles and the reign of Amasis, I have already shown them before: but for Pan, there are said to be even more years than these, and for Dionysus, the fewest of these, and they reckon that there are fifteen thousand years to the reign of Amasis. And the Egyptians say these things with certainty, always calculating and always recording the years. Now, for Dionysus, the one said to be born from Semele, the daughter of Cadmus, there are especially sixteen hundred years to me, and for Heracles, the son of Alcmene, there are nine hundred years; but for Pan, the son of Penelope (for from her and Hermes, the Greeks say, Pan was born), there are fewer years than the Trojan War, especially eight hundred years to me.
Of both of these, then, one may make use of whichever stories one is more persuaded by; but for me, my opinion about them has been declared. For if indeed they had become manifest and had grown old, these ones also in Greece, just as Heracles who was born from Amphitryon, and indeed Dionysus who was born from Semele, and Pan who was born from Penelope, one might say that these ones also, having become other men, have the names of those gods who came before. But now the Greeks say that Dionysus, as soon as he was born, was wrapped by Zeus into his thigh and carried to Nysa, which is beyond Egypt in Ethiopia, and concerning Pan, they do not have anything to say about where he went after being born. It has become clear to me that the Greeks learned of these names later than those of the other gods; and from the time when they learned of them, from this they trace their genealogy.
These things, indeed, the Egyptians themselves say; and what both the other people and the Egyptians say, agreeing with the others, that in this region it happened, I will now tell: and there will be added to them something of my own observation. Having been freed, the Egyptians, after the priest of Hephaestus ruled as king, for no time were they able to live without a king, they established twelve kings, having divided all Egypt into twelve parts. These, having made marriages with each other, ruled, using these laws, neither to overthrow one another nor to seek to have more than the other, and to be friends as much as possible. And on account of these things they made these laws, strongly binding themselves: for indeed it had been declared to them at the beginning, when they were just entering into their tyrannies, that the one who poured a libation from a bronze bowl in the temple of Hephaestus, this one would rule all Egypt: for indeed they gathered together in all the temples.
And indeed, they decided to leave a memorial for themselves in common, and they made a labyrinth, a little above the lake of Moeris, near the city called Crocodiles, lying mostly there: which I have already seen, greater in speech. For if someone were to consider the defenses and works of the Greeks, it would appear to be of less labor and expense than this labyrinth. And yet, the temple in Ephesus and the one in Samos are noteworthy. Now, the pyramids were indeed greater in speech, and each of them was worthy of many great Greek works, but this labyrinth surpasses even the pyramids: for there are twelve roofed courtyards, facing each other, six facing the north and six facing the south, continuous: and the same wall surrounds them from the outside. There are double dwellings, some underground and some above ground, on top of those, three thousand in number, fifteen hundred each. Now, we ourselves speak of the above-ground dwellings, having seen them as we passed through and having observed them, but we inquired about their underground dwellings through speech: for the Egyptians who were in charge did not want to show them at all, saying that there were burial places there for the kings who built this labyrinth at first and for the sacred crocodiles. Thus, we speak of the lower dwellings, having received them by hearing, but we ourselves saw the upper ones, greater than human works: for the exits through the roofs and the twists through the courtyards, being most varied, provided a countless spectacle, from the courtyard to the dwellings, and from the dwellings to the colonnades, and from the colonnades to other roofs, and from the dwellings to other courtyards. And the roof of all these is made of stone, just as the walls are, and the walls are full of carved figures, and each courtyard is surrounded by white stone columns, fitted together most precisely. And at the corner of the labyrinth, there is a pyramid forty orguia high, on which large animals are carved: and a road to it has been made under the ground.
Of this labyrinth being such, an even greater wonder is presented by the so-called Lake Moeris, beside which this labyrinth is built: its perimeter of the circuit is 3,600 stadia, being equal to sixty schoeni, and also equal to the coastline of Egypt itself. The lake lies long from north to south, being deep at its deepest part, fifty orguia. That it is man-made and dug out, it itself shows: for in the middle of the lake, especially, stand two pyramids, each surpassing the water by fifty orguia, and another such part is built underwater, and on both, there is a seated stone colossus on a throne. Thus, the pyramids are one hundred orguia high, and the one hundred orguia are equal to a six-plethron stadium, measured by six feet of the orguia and four cubits, with the feet being four-palms and the cubit six-palms. The water in the lake is not native (for the area is indeed very dry), but is brought in from the Nile through a canal, and for six months it flows into the lake, and for six months it flows out again into the Nile: and when it flows out, during those six months, it brings a silver talent to the royal treasury each day from the fish, and when the water flows into it, twenty minae.
The locals said that this lake drains underground into the Libyan Syrtis and stretches under the mountains above Memphis, with the inland country to its west. And since I did not see the earth from this excavation anywhere, for I was indeed curious, I asked those living closest to the lake where the excavated earth was. They explained to me where it had been taken, and I easily believed them: for I knew that another such thing had happened in the Assyrian city of Ninus. For the great wealth of King Sardanapallus of Ninus, which was stored in underground treasuries, thieves planned to steal. So, starting from their own houses, the thieves dug underground towards the royal palace, and the earth that was excavated from the tunnel, as night came, they carried it out to the Tigris River, which flows past Ninus, and the river carried it away, until they accomplished what they wanted. I heard that another such thing happened during the excavation of the lake in Egypt, except not at night but during the day: for the Egyptians, as they dug, carried the earth to the Nile River: and the river, I suppose, was going to disperse it. Now this lake is said to have been dug in this way.
Of the twelve kings who ruled with justice, when they sacrificed in the temple of Hephaestus over time, on the last day of the feast, as they were about to pour libations, the high priest brought out for them golden vessels, with which they were accustomed to pour, making a mistake in the number, there being eleven instead of twelve. At this point, as Psammetichus, the last of them standing, did not have a vessel, taking off his helmet, which was made of bronze, he held it out and poured with it. Now, all the other kings also wore helmets and happened to have them at that time. Psammetichus, then, did not use any deceitful plan when he held out his helmet: but the others, taking into their minds both what was done by Psammetichus and the oracle, which had declared to them that he who should pour a libation from a bronze vessel would be the sole king of Egypt, remembering the prophecy, they did not think it right to kill Psammetichus, as they found, upon inquiry, that he had done it without any forethought; but they decided to drive him out, having stripped him of most of his power, into the marshes, and that he should not mingle with the rest of Egypt.
This Psammetichus, who had previously fled from the Ethiopian Sabacos, who had killed his father Necos, had fled to Syria at that time. When the Ethiopian was freed from the vision of the dream, these Egyptians, who are from the district of Saïs, brought him back. Then, when he was king for the second time, he was caught by the eleven kings fleeing to the marshes because of the helmet. Knowing, therefore, that he was greatly insulted by them, he planned to take revenge on those who had driven him away. And when he sent to the city of Buto to the oracle of Leto, where indeed there is the most truthful oracle for the Egyptians, an oracle came that vengeance would come from the sea when bronze men appeared. And indeed, great disbelief had poured out for him that bronze men would come as allies. But when not much time had passed, necessity seized the Ionians and Carians, men who had sailed out for plunder, to be carried away to Egypt, and when they disembarked on the land and armed themselves with bronze, one of the Egyptians, coming to the marshes, reported to Psammetichus that bronze men, whom he had never seen before armed with bronze, had come from the sea and were plundering the plain. And when he learned that the oracle was being fulfilled, he made friends with the Ionians and Carians and, promising them great rewards, persuaded them to join him. And when he had persuaded them, in this way, together with the Egyptians who wished for his cause and the allies, he overthrew the kings.
Having gained control of all of Egypt, Psammetichus made for Hephaestus a forecourt in Memphis facing the south wind, and also an enclosure for Apis, in which the Apis is raised when it appears, built opposite the forecourt, being entirely surrounded by a colonnade and full of carved figures; and instead of columns, colossal statues twelve cubits high stand in the enclosure. The Apis, in the language of the Greeks, is called Epaphus.
To the Ionians and the Carians who had helped him, Psammetichus gave lands to inhabit opposite each other, with the Nile in the middle, which were named The Camps; he gave them these lands and fulfilled all the other promises he had made. And indeed, he had Egyptian children learn the Greek language from them. From these children who learned the language, the interpreters in Egypt have come to be. The Ionians and the Carians inhabited these lands for a long time; these lands are a little below the city of Bubastis, near the sea, at the so-called mouth of the Nile called Pelusian. Later, King Amasis, having removed them from there, settled them in Memphis, making himself a guard against the Egyptians. And when they were settled in Egypt, the Greeks, thus mingling with them, accurately learned all the things concerning Egypt, beginning with King Psammetichus and all the later events. For these were the first foreigners to settle in Egypt. From the lands from which they were removed, the ship winches and the ruins of the houses remained until my time.
Psammetichus, then, thus obtained Egypt. Now, I have already mentioned the oracle in Egypt many times, and indeed I will make an account of it, as it is worthy. For this oracle in Egypt is a sanctuary of Leto, established in a great city according to the Sebennytic mouth of the Nile called, sailing up from the sea. And the name of this city, where the oracle is, is Buto, as it has also been named to me before. There is a temple in this Buto of Apollo and Artemis, and indeed the temple of Leto, in which the oracle is, happens to be large and has the propylaea to the height of ten orguiae. But to me, the most significant wonder of the visible ones was provided, I will explain: there is in this precinct of Leto's temple, made of one stone, both in height and in length and each wall equal to forty cubits, and another stone lies on the covering of the roof, having the cornice four cubits wide.
Thus, indeed, the temple is the most marvelous of the visible things around this sanctuary to me, but the second is an island called Chemmis: it lies in a deep and wide lake near the sanctuary in Buto, and it is said by the Egyptians to be a floating island. I myself, indeed, neither saw it floating nor moving, but I marveled, hearing if it is truly a floating island. Now, in this island, there is a great temple of Apollo, and three altars are set up, and many palm trees and other trees, both fruit-bearing and not fruit-bearing, have grown in it. The Egyptians, adding this story, say that it is floating, as in this island, which was not floating before, Leto, being one of the first eight gods who came into being, and dwelling in the city of Buto, where indeed this oracle is, having received Apollo as a deposit from Isis, saved him by hiding him in the island now called floating, when Typhon came searching for the child of Osiris everywhere, wanting to find him. And they say that Apollo and Artemis are the children of Dionysus and Isis, and that Leto became their nurse and savior. In Egyptian, however, Apollo is called Horus, Demeter is Isis, and Artemis is Bubastis. From this story and no other, Aeschylus, the son of Euphorion, snatched what I will say, being the only one of the earlier poets: for he made Artemis the daughter of Demeter. And the island became floating because of this. These things are said in this way.
Psammetichus, indeed, ruled Egypt for fifty-four years, of which the necessary thirty for one, besieging Azotus, a great city of Syria, he captured it. And this Azotus, of all cities, withstood being besieged for the longest time that we know.
Necos, son of Psammetichus, became king of Egypt and first attempted the canal leading to the Red Sea, which Darius the Persian later dug. The length of it is a four days' journey by ship, and it was dug wide enough for two triremes to sail side by side. The water comes into it from the Nile, and it flows in above the city of Bubastis, by the Arabian town of Patumus, and runs into the Red Sea. It was dug first in the part of the Egyptian plain which borders on Arabia, and runs along the base of the mountain that stretches towards Memphis, where the stone quarries are. From the western end of this mountain, the canal runs from the setting to the rising sun, and then turns southward towards the Arabian Gulf. The shortest and most direct passage from the northern sea to the southern, which is the same as the Red Sea, is from the Casian mountain, which forms the boundary between Egypt and Syria, to the Arabian Gulf, and is a distance of about 1,000 stadia. This is the shortest route, but the canal is much longer, as it is more winding. During the reign of Necos, 120,000 Egyptians perished in the digging of it. Necos, however, stopped the work in the middle, being deterred by an oracle of this kind, that he was laboring for the barbarian. The Egyptians call all men of other languages barbarians.
Necos, having stopped the digging of the canal, turned to military campaigns, and triremes were built both on the northern sea and in the Arabian Gulf on the Red Sea coast, the launching places of which are still visible. And Necos used these ships when necessary, and having fought the Syrians on foot at Magdolus, he was victorious, and after the battle, he captured the great city of Cadytis in Syria. And having achieved these things in his attire, he sent offerings to the Branchidae of Miletus and dedicated them to Apollo. And after ruling for sixteen years in total, he died, leaving the kingship to his son Psammis.
Upon this Psammis, king of Egypt, the ambassadors from Elis arrived, boasting that they had established the Olympic games with the utmost justice and fairness of all men, and thinking that not even the wisest of the Egyptians could find anything better. And when the Eleans arrived in Egypt and said for what reason they had come, this king summoned the Egyptians who were said to be the wisest. And when the Egyptians had come together, they inquired of the Eleans, saying everything that concerned them to do about the games. And having learned everything, they said they had come to find out if the Egyptians could find anything more just than this. And they, having deliberated, asked the Eleans if their citizens competed with them. And they said that both they and the other Greeks were allowed to compete in the games, just as they wished. And the Egyptians said that they, having established this, had missed all justice. For there was no device by which they would not add to their own citizens competing, wronging the foreigner. But if indeed they wished to establish justly, and for this reason they had come to Egypt, they ordered the games to be established for foreign competitors, and for no Elean to compete. These things the Egyptians proposed to the Eleans.
Psammis, having ruled Egypt for only six years, and having campaigned against Ethiopia and shortly after having met his end, was succeeded by Apries, the son of Psammis, who, after Psammetichus, his own great-grandfather, became the most fortunate of the earlier kings, ruling for twenty-five years, during which he drove an army against Sidon and fought a naval battle with the king of Tyre. But when it was necessary for him to suffer misfortune, it happened from a pretext which I will relate more fully in the Libyan stories, and briefly in the present. For Apries, having sent an army against the Cyrenaeans, suffered a great disaster, and the Egyptians, blaming him for this, rebelled against him, thinking that Apries had purposely sent them to an apparent disaster, so that destruction might come upon them, and he himself might rule the remaining Egyptians more securely. These things, being greatly angered, both those who had returned and the friends of those who had perished, openly revolted from the straight path.
But when Apries learned of these things, he sent Amasis to them to put an end to their words. And when he arrived, he found the Egyptians not doing these things, and as he spoke, one of the Egyptians stood behind him and placed a helmet on him, and having put it on, he said that he was putting it on for kingship. And for him, the thing being done was by no means voluntary, as he showed. For when the Egyptians who had revolted made him king, he prepared as if he would attack Apries. But when Apries learned of these things, he sent a man of repute among the Egyptians around him, whose name was Patarbemis, having instructed him to bring Amasis to him alive. But when Patarbemis arrived and called Amasis, Amasis, for he happened to be sitting on a horse, lifted up and broke wind, and he told Apries to take this away. Nevertheless, he asked Patarbemis to go to him when the king sent for him: but he replied to him that he had long been preparing to do these things, and that Apries should not blame him: for he himself would be present and would bring others. But Patarbemis did not fail to understand the intention from the things being said, and seeing him preparing earnestly to go away, he wanted to report the things being done to the king as quickly as possible. But when he arrived at Apries not bringing Amasis, giving him no account but eagerly wanting to cut off both his ears and his nose. And when the other Egyptians saw the most esteemed man among them so shamefully treated with outrage, they no longer hesitated to distrust the others and gave themselves to Amasis.
But when Apries learned of these things, he armed the mercenaries and drove them against the Egyptians; and he had around himself Carians and Ionians, thirty thousand men as mercenaries; and his royal palace was in the city of Sais, being great and worthy of admiration. And those around Apries went against the Egyptians, and those around Amasis went against the foreigners; and indeed, in the city of Momemphis, both sides came together and were about to try each other.
There are, indeed, seven classes of Egyptians, and of these some are priests, some are warriors, some are cowherds, some are swineherds, some are merchants, some are interpreters, and some are pilots. There are so many classes of Egyptians, and their names are derived from their professions. The warriors among them are called Kalasiries and Hermotubies, and they are from these districts: for indeed, all of Egypt is divided according to districts.
The districts of the Hermotubies are these: Busirite, Saite, Chemmite, Papremite, the island called Prosopitis, and half of Natho. From these districts come the Hermotubies, who, when they were at their greatest number, were sixteen myriads. And of these, none have learned any mechanical trade, but they are devoted to the art of war.
The other districts of the Kalasiries are these: Theban, Bubastite, Aphthite, Tanite, Mendesian, Sebennite, Athribite, Pharbaithite, Thmuite, Onuphite, Anytite, and Myecphorite; this district dwells on an island opposite the city of Bubastis. These are the districts of the Kalasiries, who, when they were at their greatest number, were twenty-five myriads of men. Neither is it allowed for these men to practice any trade, but they are devoted to the art of war alone, a son receiving it from his father.
If indeed the Greeks have learned this also from the Egyptians, I cannot determine with certainty, seeing that I observe Thracians, Scythians, Persians, Lydians, and almost all other barbarians to hold those who learn crafts and their descendants in less esteem than the rest of the citizens, while those who have been freed from manual labor are considered noble, especially those who devote themselves to the art of war. Thus, all the Greeks have learned this, and especially the Lacedaemonians. But the Corinthians least of all despise the craftsmen.
The privileges for them were these, set apart for them alone among the Egyptians besides the priests: twelve select arable lands for each, tax-free. Now the arable land is a hundred cubits of Egyptians on every side, and the Egyptian cubit happens to be equal to the Samian. So these were set apart for all of them, and they cultivated these in rotation and not at all by themselves. A thousand Kalasiries and a thousand Hermotubies served as bodyguards for the king each year: so for these, besides the arable lands, other things were given to them for each day, a measure of five minae of roasted grain for each, two minae of beef, and four cups of wine. These things were given to those who always served as bodyguards.
When Apries, leading his allies, and Amasis, with all the Egyptians, came together and arrived at the city of Momemphis, they engaged in battle. The foreign troops fought well, but being greatly outnumbered, they were defeated. It is said that Apries had the mindset that not even a god could depose him from his kingship, so securely did he think he had established himself. But then, having been defeated and captured, he was brought to the city of Saïs, to the house that had once been his own, but was then already the palace of Amasis. There, for a while, he was kept alive in the royal quarters, and Amasis treated him well. But in the end, when the Egyptians complained that he was not doing what was right by keeping alive the man who was their and his own worst enemy, Amasis thus handed Apries over to the Egyptians. They strangled him and then buried him in the ancestral tombs, which are in the temple of Athena, very close to the sanctuary, on the left side as one enters. The Saïtes buried all the kings who came from this district within the temple. And indeed, the tomb of Amasis is further from the sanctuary than that of Apries and his forefathers, but it is also in the temple court, a large stone colonnade, adorned with pillars imitating palm trees and other expenses. Inside the colonnade, there are two doors standing opposite each other, and within these doors lies the coffin.
There are also the tombs of him whose name I deem it unholy to mention in such a matter, in Saïs, in the temple of Athena, behind the temple, holding the entire wall of Athena. And in the sacred precinct, there stand large stone obelisks, and there is a lake held by a stone foundation, adorned and well-worked all around, and in size, as it seemed to me, as much as the one in Delos called the Wheel-like. In Saïs, there is also a burial site of someone whose name I believe it would be disrespectful to mention in this context. This tomb is located in the temple of Athena, behind and near the wall of the shrine. Additionally, there are large stone obelisks within the temple grounds, and a nearby circular lake with a stone border. This lake appears to be similar in size to the one in Delos, known as the Round Pond.
In this lake, they perform at night the representations of his sufferings, which the Egyptians call mysteries. About these, knowing more than what is allowed, let my account be silent. And concerning the rites of Demeter, which the Greeks call Thesmophoria, let my account also be silent, except for as much as it is lawful to say. The daughters of Danaus were the ones who brought this ritual from Egypt and taught it to the Pelasgian women. But after the entire Peloponnese was driven out by the Dorians, the ritual was lost, and the Arcadians, who were the only Peloponnesians left behind and did not migrate, preserved it alone.
After Apries was dethroned, Amasis became king, being of the Saïte nome, and from the city which is called Siuph. At first, the Egyptians looked down upon Amasis and held him in no great regard, since he had been a commoner and not of distinguished family. But later, through his wisdom, he won them over, not by harshness but by his humility. He had many other great possessions, and among them a golden foot-washing basin, in which both he and all his guests would wash their feet. So, breaking this up, he made a statue of a god from it and set it up in the most suitable part of the city. The Egyptians, coming to the statue, greatly revered it. When Amasis learned what was being done by the citizens, he called the Egyptians together and revealed to them, saying that the statue had been made from the foot-washing basin, in which the Egyptians had previously vomited, urinated, and washed their feet, but now they greatly revered it. So, he said, speaking, that he himself was similar to the foot-washing basin: for if he had been a commoner before, he was now their king. And he commanded them to honor and take care of him.
In such a manner, he approached the Egyptians so as to make them serve justly, and he used this kind of daily routine: in the morning, until the marketplace was full, he eagerly attended to the matters brought before him; but after that, he drank and joked with his fellow drinkers and was frivolous and playful. His friends, being displeased with this, advised him, saying, "O King, you do not rightly stand before yourself, leading yourself to excessive baseness. For you ought to sit on a solemn throne, solemnly attending to matters throughout the day, and thus the Egyptians would trust that they are ruled by a great man, and you would hear better things. Now, you do not act at all like a king." He answered them with these words: "Those who possess bows, when they need to use them, they string them; for if they were always strung, they would break, so that they would not be able to use them when needed. So too is the condition of a man: if he were always to be serious and never allow himself to relax for play, he would either go mad or become foolish without realizing it. Knowing this, I allot a portion to each." He replied thus to his friends.
It is said that Amasis, even when he was a private citizen, was fond of drinking and jesting, and was by no means a serious man. When his indulgent lifestyle left him lacking in necessities, he would go about stealing. Those who accused him of taking their possessions would bring him to a place of divination, where each had their own. Many times he was indeed caught by the oracles, but many times he also escaped. Then, when he became king, he did the following: as for those gods who had acquitted him of being a thief, he neither took care of their temples nor gave anything for their repair, nor did he offer sacrifices when visiting them, as if they were unworthy of anything, having false oracles. But as for those who had convicted him of being a thief, he took great care of them, considering them to be true gods and their oracles truthful.
And indeed, in Saïs, he made the outer court for Athena, surpassing all others in height and size, with stones of great magnitude and of such quality. He also dedicated colossal statues and long sphinxes with human heads, and he brought other stones of extraordinary size for the construction. These stones were brought from the quarries around Memphis, while the extremely large ones were brought from the city of Elephantine, which is twenty days' journey away from Saïs. But the most impressive of all, which I marvel at the most, is this: he brought a single-block dwelling from the city of Elephantine, and this was transported for three years, and two thousand men were assigned to transport it, all of whom were pilots. The external dimensions of this roof are twenty-one cubits in length, fourteen cubits in width, and eight cubits in height. These are the external measurements of the single-block roof, but inside, the length is eighteen cubits and a span, and the height is five cubits. This lies beside the entrance of the temple; for they say that it was not drawn inside the temple for this reason: as the roof was being drawn, the chief architect sighed, as much time had passed and he was burdened by the work, and Amasis, taking it to heart, did not allow it to be drawn any further. However, some say that a man was crushed by it, one of those who were levering it, and that it was not drawn inside because of this.
And indeed, Amasis dedicated works of great magnitude, worthy of admiration, in all the other temples that were considered significant, and also in Memphis, the colossal statue lying down in front of the temple of Hephaestus, which is seventy-five feet in length. And on the same base, there are two colossal statues, each twenty feet in size, made of the same stone, one on this side and the other on that side of the great statue. There is also another stone statue of such size in Saïs, lying down in the same manner as the one in Memphis. Amasis is the one who built the temple of Isis in Memphis, which is both large and most worthy of admiration.
Upon Amasis the king, it is said that Egypt indeed at that time especially prospered, both from the river to the land and from the land to the people, and in it a city of all those inhabited then became twenty thousand. And this law for the Egyptians is the one established by Amasis, to show every year to the local ruler each of some Egyptians from where he makes a living: and not doing this nor showing a just livelihood, to be punished with death. And Solon the Athenian, having taken this law from Egypt, set it for the Athenians: to which they always use it being an excellent law.
Amasis, having become a friend of the Greeks, not only welcomed them in various ways, but also gave the city of Naucratis to those who came to Egypt to live in; and for those who did not wish to live there but were engaged in trade, he gave them places to establish altars and sanctuaries for their gods. Now the greatest and most famous of these sanctuaries, being also the most useful, is called the Hellenion, and these are the cities that established it jointly: of the Ionians, Chios, Teos, Phocaea, and Clazomenae; of the Dorians, Rhodes, Cnidus, Halicarnassus, and Phaselis; and of the Aeolians, only Mytilene. This sanctuary belongs to these cities, and they are the ones who provide overseers for the trading port; as for any other cities that claim to have a share, they claim it without any right. Apart from these, the Aeginetans established a sanctuary of Zeus on their own, and the Samians another one for Hera, and the Milesians for Apollo.
In the past, Naucratis alone was the trading port and no other in Egypt. And if someone happened to arrive at any other mouths of the Nile, they had to swear that they did not come willingly, and having sworn, they had to sail with their ship to the Canobic entrance. Or if it was not possible to sail against opposing winds, they had to transport their cargo in small boats around the Delta, until they reached Naucratis. Thus indeed, Naucratis was highly esteemed.
And the Amphictyons having rented the now existing temple in Delphi for three hundred talents to be built (for the previous one there had burned down by itself), the Delphians indeed were required to provide a quarter of the rent. And the Delphians, wandering about the cities, were collecting donations, and while doing this, they carried not the least from Egypt: for Amasis indeed gave them a thousand talents of alum, and the Greeks living in Egypt gave twenty minae.
Amasis, however, formed a friendship and alliance with the Cyrenaeans, and he decided to marry a woman from there, either because he desired a Greek wife or for the sake of friendship with the Cyrenaeans. So he married a woman who some say was the daughter of Battus, others of Arcesilaus, and others of Critobulus, a respected citizen, and her name was Ladice. But when Amasis lay with her, he was unable to have intercourse, while with his other wives he had intercourse. And when this happened often, Amasis said to the so-called Ladice, "O woman, you have cast a spell on me, and there is no way for you not to perish most miserably of all women." And when Ladice, after denying it, found that Amasis was not gentler, she prayed in her mind to Aphrodite, that if Amasis had intercourse with her that night, for this was the cause of her trouble, she would send a statue to her in Cyrene. And after the prayer, Amasis immediately had intercourse with her. And from then on, whenever Amasis came to her, he had intercourse, and he loved her very much after this. And Ladice paid back the vow to the goddess: for having made a statue, she sent it to Cyrene, which was still safe even in my time, turned outside the city of the Cyrenaeans. This Ladice, when Cambyses conquered Egypt and learned who she was, he sent her back unharmed to Cyrene.
Amasis indeed dedicated offerings in Greece: this one to Cyrene, a gold-plated statue of Athena and a painted image of himself; this one to Athena in Lindus, two stone statues and a noteworthy linen breastplate; this one to Hera in Samos, wooden statues of himself with two faces, which were still set up in the great temple even until my time, behind the doors. Now to Samos he dedicated offerings on account of the guest-friendship of himself and Polycrates, son of Aeaces; but to Lindus not on account of any guest-friendship, but because the temple in Lindus, that of Athena, is said to have been founded by the daughters of Danaus when they fled from the sons of Egyptus. These offerings Amasis dedicated, and he was the first of men to conquer Cyprus and to make it tributary.