Upon this Amasis, Cambyses, the son of Cyrus, waged war, leading not only other troops which he ruled, but also Greeks, both Ionians and Aeolians, for the following reason. Cambyses sent a herald to Egypt asking Amasis for his daughter, and he asked this based on the advice of an Egyptian man, who, blaming Amasis, urged him to do this because Amasis had taken him away from his wife and children and sent him to the Persians, when Cyrus sent to Amasis asking for an eye-doctor who would be the best in Egypt. So, blaming Amasis for these things, the Egyptian urged him to ask Cambyses to request Amasis' daughter, so that either by giving her away he would be grieved or by not giving her away he would become hateful to Cambyses. But Amasis, being troubled by the power of the Persians and fearing, was not able to either give her away or refuse: for he knew well that Cambyses was not going to have her as a wife but as a concubine. So, considering these things, he did the following. There was a daughter of Apries, the former king, very tall and beautiful, the only one left of the house, and her name was Nitetis. This girl Amasis dressed in fine clothes and gold and sent her to the Persians as his own daughter. After some time, as Cambyses embraced her, calling her by her father's name, the girl said to him, "O king, deceived by Amasis, you do not understand that he dressed me up and sent me to you as his own daughter, while in truth I am the daughter of Apries, whom he, being his master, rebelled against with the Egyptians and killed." This word, then, and this reason, having come about, led Cambyses, the son of Cyrus, greatly angered, to wage war upon Egypt.
Thus, indeed, the Persians say. But the Egyptians claim Cambyses as their own, saying that he was born from this daughter of Apries: for they say it was Cyrus who sent to Amasis for the daughter, not Cambyses. But in saying this, they do not speak correctly. For it has not escaped their notice (for if any others, the Egyptians know the customs of the Persians) that first, it is not their law for a bastard to rule when there is a legitimate heir present, and again, that Cambyses was the son of Cassandane, the daughter of Pharnaspes, a man of Achaemenid lineage, and not of the Egyptian woman. But they twist the story, pretending to be related to the house of Cyrus.
And this story indeed stands thus. But there is also another tale told, which to me is not credible, that one of the Persian women went in to the wives of Cyrus, and when she saw the children of Cassandane standing by, both tall and good-looking, she used much praise, greatly marveling at them; and Cassandane, being the wife of Cyrus, said these words: "Yet, being the mother of such children, Cyrus holds me in dishonor, and honors the woman from Egypt." She said this being grieved about Nitetis. And the eldest of the children, Cambyses, said: "For this reason, O mother, when I become a man, I will turn Egypt upside down, both the upper parts to the lower, and the lower parts to the upper." He said this being about ten years old, and the women were struck with amazement; and he, remembering this, when he became a man and obtained the kingdom, made the expedition against Egypt.
And indeed, another such event occurred in relation to this campaign. There was among the mercenaries a man named Phanes, of Halicarnassian origin, who was both wise and skilled in warfare. This Phanes, having some quarrel with Amasis, fled by ship from Egypt, wishing to come to Cambyses for discussion. Knowing that he was of no small account among the mercenaries and very knowledgeable about Egypt, Amasis pursued him with great zeal to capture him, sending his most trusted eunuch with a trireme after him. The eunuch captured Phanes in Lycia, but he did not bring him back to Egypt; for Phanes outwitted him with cunning: having made the guards drunk, he escaped to the Persians. And when Cambyses was preparing to march against Egypt and was at a loss about the crossing, how to traverse the waterless desert, Phanes came and informed him not only of the other matters of Amasis, but also explained the crossing, advising thus: to send a message to the king of the Arabians, asking him to provide a safe passage.
But indeed, there is only this one clear entrance into Egypt. For from Phoenicia as far as the borders of the city of Cadytis, it is the land of the Syrians called Palestinians; and from Cadytis, being a city, as it seems to me, not much smaller than Sardis, from this city the trading ports on the sea as far as the city of Ienysus belong to the Arabians, and from Ienysus again, the Syrians as far as the Serbonian marsh, beside which indeed the Casian mountain stretches towards the sea; and from the Serbonian marsh, in which the story says Typho has been hidden, from this marsh, Egypt already begins. Now indeed, between the city of Ienysus and the Casian mountain and the Serbonian marsh, being not a small region but as much as a journey of three days, it is terribly waterless.
But few of those who sail to Egypt know this, which I am about to tell. To Egypt from all of Greece and also from Phoenicia, earthenware jars full of wine are brought twice each year, and yet, one would not be able to see, in number, even one wine jar, so to speak. Where, then, one might say, do these disappear? I will also explain this: each governor must collect all the earthenware from his own city and bring it to Memphis, and those from Memphis must transport them, filled with water, to these very waterless parts of Syria. Thus, the earthenware that is brought to Egypt and taken out is carried to Syria, upon the old stock.
Thus indeed now the Persians, who prepared this entrance into Egypt, having dug as mentioned for water, then as quickly as possible took possession of Egypt. But at that time, there being no readily available water, Cambyses, having learned from the Halicarnassian guest, sent messengers to the Arabian and having asked for safety, he succeeded, both giving and receiving trust from him.
The Arabians highly value trust among men, and they establish it in the following manner: when someone wishes to make a pledge with another man, a third person stands between them, and with a sharp stone, he cuts the inside of their hands near the big fingers of those making the pledges. Then, taking a piece of cloth from each of their garments, he anoints with the blood seven stones lying in the middle, while invoking Dionysus and the Heavenly Aphrodite. After completing these actions, the one who made the pledges entrusts the stranger or the fellow citizen to his friends, if he makes the pledge with a fellow citizen; and the friends themselves also consider it just to honor the pledges. They regard Dionysus and the Heavenly Aphrodite as the only gods, and they say that they cut their hair in the same way as Dionysus himself: they cut it in a circle around the head, shaving the temples. They call Dionysus Orotalt, and the Heavenly Aphrodite Alilat.
So when the Arabian made the pledge to the messengers who had come from Cambyses, he devised the following plan: filling camel-skins with water, he loaded them onto all the camels, and having done this, he drove them into the waterless region and waited there for the army of Cambyses. This is the more credible of the stories that have been told, but it is necessary also to mention the less credible one, since it is indeed spoken of. There is a great river in Arabia, named Corys, which flows out into the so-called Red Sea: from this river, then, it is said that the king of the Arabians, having sewn together oxhides and other hides into a conduit of great length, led the water into the waterless region, and that he dug large tanks in the desert to receive and preserve the water. The journey from the river to this waterless region is twelve days. And it is said that he brought the water through three conduits to three different places.
In the so-called Pelusian mouth of the Nile, Psammenitus, the son of Amasis, was encamped, awaiting Cambyses. For Cambyses, when he marched against Egypt, did not find Amasis still living; but Amasis, having been king for forty-four years, had died, and during his reign, no great misfortune had befallen him. And having died and been embalmed, he was buried in the tombs in the temple, which he himself had built. But during the reign of Psammenitus, the son of Amasis, over Egypt, a great portent occurred for the Egyptians: for the Theban Egyptians experienced rain, neither ever having experienced it before nor afterward up until my time, as the Thebans themselves say. For indeed, the upper parts of Egypt do not experience rain at all. But even then, the Thebans experienced a light drizzle.
But the Persians, after they had crossed the waterless region and were encamped near the Egyptians, as if preparing to engage, then the allies of the Egyptian, being men both Greeks and Carians, angry at Phanes because he had led a foreign army into Egypt, contrived against him such a thing. Phanes had sons left behind in Egypt: these they brought to the camp and set up a mixing bowl in the sight of their father between the two armies, and then they led each of the sons one by one and slaughtered them over the mixing bowl; and when they had gone through all the sons, they poured wine and water into it, and all the allies, having drunk of the blood, thus indeed engaged. And when a fierce battle took place and many from both armies had fallen, the Egyptians were routed.
I saw a great marvel when I learned from the locals: for the bones of those who had fallen in this battle were scattered separately, each side's bones lying apart (for the bones of the Persians lay in one place, as they had been divided according to their divisions, and in another place those of the Egyptians); the skulls of the Persians are so weak that, if you wish to strike with only a pebble, you would break through, but those of the Egyptians are so strong that you would hardly break them by striking with a stone. The cause of this, they said, and they easily persuaded me, is that the Egyptians, beginning from childhood, shave their heads and the bone thickens by exposure to the sun. The same thing is also the cause of their not going bald: for among the Egyptians one might see the fewest bald men of all people. This, then, is the cause for them to have strong skulls, but for the Persians, the cause that they have weak skulls is this: they are raised in the shade, wearing felt caps called tiaras from the beginning. These things, then, are such as these: I also saw other similar things in Papremis of those who had perished together with Achaemenes, the son of Darius, destroyed by Inaros the Libyan.
After the Egyptians were defeated in the battle, they retreated in no order. When they were trapped in Memphis, Cambyses sent a Persian messenger on a Mytilenean ship up the river to propose peace to the Egyptians. But when the Egyptians saw the ship entering Memphis, they poured out in a crowd from the wall, destroyed the ship, and tore the men apart limb by limb, carrying them back to the wall. After this, the Egyptians were besieged for a time and then surrendered, and the neighboring Libyans, fearing what had happened in Egypt, surrendered themselves without a fight and imposed a tribute on themselves and sent gifts. So too did the Cyrenaeans and Barcaeans, who were likewise frightened like the Libyans, do such things. Cambyses, however, graciously accepted the gifts that came from the Libyans, but he was displeased with those that came from the Cyrenaeans, as it seems to me, because they were too few. For the Cyrenaeans had indeed sent five hundred silver minae, which Cambyses, seizing with his own hand, scattered among the army.
On the tenth day after Cambyses took the wall of Memphis, he seated Psammenitus, the king of the Egyptians who had ruled for six months, in the outer part of the city with other Egyptians, intending to test his spirit by doing the following: he sent his daughter dressed in slave's clothing to fetch water with a pitcher, along with other maidens chosen from the sons of the foremost men, dressed similarly to the king's daughter. As the maidens passed by with cries and lamentations in front of their fathers, all the others shouted and wept at the sight of their children mistreated, but Psammenitus, having seen and recognized, bent down to the ground. When the water carriers had passed by, he sent his son with two thousand other Egyptians of the same age, their necks bound with ropes and their mouths bridled: they were being led to pay the penalty for the Mytileneans who had perished in Memphis with their ship. For the royal judges had decreed that for each man, ten of the foremost Egyptians should be destroyed. When he saw them passing by and recognized his son being led to death, Psammenitus did the same as he had done for his daughter, while the other Egyptians sitting around him wept and made a great commotion. When these had passed by, it so happened that of his fellow diners, a man somewhat older, fallen from his former possessions and having nothing but what a beggar and one who begs from the army would have, passed by Psammenitus, the son of Amasis, and the Egyptians sitting in the outer part of the city. When Psammenitus saw him, he wept loudly and, calling his companion by name, struck his head. Now there were guards of his who reported to Cambyses everything that was done by him at each exit. Wondering at what was being done, Cambyses sent a messenger to ask him, saying these things: "Cambyses, your master, Psammenitus, asks you why, seeing your daughter mistreated and your son going to his death, you neither cried out nor wept, but you honored the beggar, who is nothing to you, as he learns from others." He, indeed, asked these things, but he answered with the following: "O son of Cyrus, my own misfortunes were too great for tears, but the grief of my companion was worthy of tears, who, having fallen from many and good fortunes, has come to beggary at the door of old age." And when these things were reported by him, they seemed to them to have been well said, and, as the Egyptians say, Croesus wept (for he too had been equipped and was following Cambyses to Egypt), and the Persians who were present wept. Cambyses himself felt some pity, and immediately ordered them to save his son from those being destroyed and to bring him up from the outer part of the city and lead him to himself.
Indeed, when the men went to fetch Psammenitus' son, they found him no longer alive, but rather having been the first to be cut down. And they, having raised Psammenitus, led him to Cambyses, where for the rest of his life he lived, suffering no violence. If indeed he had been trusted not to meddle too much, he would have received Egypt so as to be its steward, since the Persians are accustomed to honor the sons of kings; even if they rebel against them, they still give the rule to their children. Now there are many other instances to consider that they have established this custom to do so, but among them are the cases of Thannyras, son of Inaros, who received the rule his father had, and Pausiris, son of Amyrtaeus; for he too received his father's rule. And yet, neither Inaros nor Amyrtaeus did more harm to the Persians. But now, Psammenitus, plotting evil, received his reward: for having incited the Egyptians, he was captured; and then, having become distrusted by Cambyses, he drank bull's blood and immediately died. Thus indeed, this man met his end.
Cambyses then went from Memphis to the city of Sais, wishing to do what he indeed did. For when he entered the house of Amasis, he immediately ordered the body of Amasis to be brought out of the tomb. And when this was accomplished, he ordered it to be whipped, the hair to be plucked out, and to be stabbed with goads, and to be desecrated in every other way. And when they had done this (for the corpse, being embalmed, withstood and did not fall apart), Cambyses ordered it to be burned, commanding things that were not sacred: for the Persians consider fire to be a god. Therefore, burning the dead is by no means lawful for either people, for the Persians, for the reason mentioned, saying that it is not right to give a human corpse to a god; and for the Egyptians, fire is considered to be a living creature, and it devours everything it catches, and when it is filled with food, it dies together with the devoured. Therefore, it is by no means a custom for them to give the corpse to animals, and for this reason they embalm, so that it may not lie and be eaten by worms. Thus, Cambyses commanded things that were not customary for either people. However, the Egyptians say that it was not Amasis who suffered these things, but another of the Egyptians who had the same age as Amasis, and the Persians, mistreating him, thought they were desecrating Amasis. For they say that Amasis, having learned from an oracle about what would happen to him after his death, buried this man, who was whipped, near the doors within his own tomb, and he himself instructed his son to place him in the farthest corner of the tomb. Now these commands from Amasis, concerning the burial and the man, do not seem to me to have originated, but the Egyptians revere them otherwise.
After these things, Cambyses planned three expeditions: one against the Carthaginians, another against the Ammonians, and a third against the long-lived Ethiopians, who lived in Libya by the southern sea. And as he planned, it seemed best to him to send the naval force against the Carthaginians, to separate a part of the infantry against the Ammonians, and first to send scouts against the Ethiopians, to see if there truly is the so-called Table of the Sun among these Ethiopians, and to observe the other things as well, while bringing gifts to their king in word.
The Table of the Sun is said to be something like this: there is a meadow in the outskirts filled with cooked meats of all kinds of quadrupeds, in which the city's leaders, who are in office at any given time, lay out the meat during the nights, and during the days, anyone who wants to can come and feast. The locals say that the earth itself provides these meats each time. This is the story of the "Table of the Sun."
The so-called Table of the Sun is said to be like this. When Cambyses thought to send spies, he immediately sent for the Fish-eaters from the city of Elephantine, men who knew the Ethiopian language. While these men were being brought, he ordered the naval force to sail against Carthage. But the Phoenicians said they would not do this, for they were bound by great oaths, and it would not be right for them to wage war against their own children. Since the Phoenicians were not willing, the rest were not strong enough to fight. Thus, the Carthaginians escaped slavery to the Persians: for Cambyses did not think it right to use force against the Phoenicians, since they had given themselves to the Persians, and the entire naval force depended on the Phoenicians. The Cyprians, having also given themselves to the Persians, were campaigning against Egypt.
And when the Fish-eaters arrived from Elephantine for Cambyses, he sent them to the Ethiopians, instructing them to say what was necessary and carrying gifts: a purple garment, a twisted gold necklace, bracelets, an alabaster jar of perfume, and a jar of palm wine. Now these Ethiopians, to whom Cambyses sent, are said to be the tallest and most beautiful of all people. They use laws and customs separate from those of other people, and indeed, in regard to kingship, in this way: they consider the one whom they judge to be the tallest among the citizens and to have strength in proportion to his size, to be worthy of ruling.
So when the Fish-eaters arrived among these men, they gave the gifts to their king and said these things: "King of the Persians, Cambyses, wishing to become your friend and guest, sent us to come to you with these words, and he gives you these gifts with which he himself most delights in using." But the Ethiopian, learning that they had come as spies, said to them these things: "Neither did the king of the Persians send you bearing gifts, valuing much to become my guest, nor do you speak the truth (for you have come as spies of my rule), nor is that man just. For if he were just, he would not have desired another's land than his own, nor would he have led people into slavery who have done him no wrong. Now, giving him this bow, say these words: 'The king of the Ethiopians advises the king of the Persians, when the Persians being so great in size can so easily draw these bows, then to attack the long-lived Ethiopians with a multitude surpassing them; but until then, to be grateful to the gods, who do not put it into the minds of the Ethiopian children to acquire other land in addition to their own.'"
Having said this, the Ethiopian king handed the bow to the visitors. Then, picking up the purple garment, he asked what it was and how it was made. When the Fish-eaters told the truth about the purple dye and the dyeing process, the king said that the people were deceitful and their clothes were deceitful as well. Next, he inquired about the twisted gold necklace and the bracelets. As the Fish-eaters explained their decoration, the king laughed and, thinking they were shackles, said that among his people there were stronger shackles than these. Thirdly, he asked about the perfume. When they spoke about its production and use, he gave the same response as he did about the garment. But when he came to the wine and asked about its production, being delighted with the drink, he inquired what food the king ate and how long a Persian man lived at most. They said that the king ate bread, explaining the nature of wheat, and that the longest life for a man was set at eighty years. In response to this, the Ethiopian said that he did not wonder at all if they lived only a few years, eating dung. For they would not even be able to live that long, he said, if they did not lift themselves up with the drink, pointing out the wine to the Fish-eaters. For in this, he said, they would be made subject to the Persians.
The Fish-eaters then asked the Ethiopian king about their lifespan and diet. He said that most of them lived up to a hundred and twenty years, and some even longer. Their food consisted of boiled meat and their drink was milk. The spies were amazed at the long lifespans, so the king led them to a spring. It is said that when they washed in the spring, their skin became smoother, as if they had used oil, and the water smelled like violets. The spies mentioned that the water was so light that nothing would float on it, not even wood or anything lighter; everything sank to the bottom. It is likely that the regular use of this water contributed to the people's long lives. After leaving the spring, the king took them to a prison where all the prisoners were bound with golden chains. In Ethiopia, bronze was considered very rare and valuable. Finally, they were shown the so-called "Table of the Sun."
After this, they finally observed their burial places, which are said to be prepared from glass in such a manner: when they have made the corpse thin, either indeed according to the Egyptians or in some other way, having covered it entirely with a painted plaster, they imitate the appearance to the extent possible, and then those standing around place it in a hollow column made of glass; and this is abundant and easily excavated for them. In the middle of the column, the corpse is visible, neither giving off any unpleasant odor nor anything else unseemly, and it has everything clearly visible, similar to the corpse itself. For a year, indeed, the most closely related keep the column in their houses, offering first fruits and sacrifices to all those who approach; and after this, having carried it out, they set it up around the city.
Having seen everything, the spies returned back. And when they reported these things, immediately Cambyses, having become angry, set out to attack the Ethiopians, neither having ordered any preparation of food nor giving any consideration to himself that he was about to march to the ends of the earth: but being both mad and not in his right mind, as he heard from the Fish-eaters, he set out, having ordered the Greeks who were present with him to stay behind, and taking all the infantry with him. And when he was marching and had come to Thebes, he separated from the army about fifty thousand men, and to these he gave orders to enslave the Ammonians and to burn the oracle of Zeus, while he himself, leading the rest of the army, went towards the Ethiopians. But before the fifth part of the journey had been completed by the army, immediately all the provisions they had were left behind, and after the provisions, the pack animals were left behind, being eaten. Now if Cambyses, having learned these things, had come to his senses and led the army back, he would have been a wise man after the initial mistake: but now, making no account of anything, he always went forward. And the soldiers, as long as they had something to take from the earth, survived by eating grass; but when they came to the sand, they did a terrible deed: for having drawn lots, they ate one of their own men. And when Cambyses learned these things, fearing the cannibalism, he left the expedition against the Ethiopians and went back, and he arrived in Thebes having lost many of his army: and having gone down from Thebes to Memphis, he sent the Greeks to sail away.
The expedition against the Ethiopians indeed ended in such a way: and those who were sent against the Ammonians, having set out to wage war, when they had set forth from Thebes and were traveling with guides, they arrived, it is clear, at the city of Oasis, which the Samians of the Aeschrionian tribe are said to inhabit, and it is distant a seven days' journey from Thebes through sand: and this place is called, in the language of the Greeks, the Island of the Blessed. Indeed, to this place the army is said to have arrived, but from there on, since neither the Ammonians themselves nor those who heard from them have anything to say about them, no others have any knowledge concerning them: for they neither reached the Ammonians nor returned back. But this is said by the Ammonians themselves: when they were going from this Oasis through the sand towards them, and when they happened to be about in the middle between them and the Oasis, a strong and extraordinary south wind blew upon them as they were taking their midday meal, and bearing heaps of the sand, it buried them, and in such a manner they disappeared. The Ammonians indeed say that such a thing happened concerning this army.
When Cambyses had come back to Memphis, the Apis appeared to the Egyptians, whom the Greeks call Epaphus. And when this one had appeared, immediately the Egyptians wore the most beautiful clothes and were in feasts. Seeing these things being done by the Egyptians, Cambyses, completely suspecting them of celebrating these things joyfully because he had fared badly, called the guardians of Memphis, and when they had come into his presence, he asked why, when he had been in Memphis before, the Egyptians had done nothing like this, but now, since he himself was present, having lost some multitude of his army. And they explained that a god had appeared to them, being accustomed to appear after a long time, and that when he appeared, then all the Egyptians would celebrate joyfully. Hearing these things, Cambyses said that they were lying, and as liars, he punished them with death.
Having killed these, he summoned the priests to his presence for a second time. And when the priests said the same things, he declared that he would not be deceived if some god, being a poor helper, had come to the Egyptians. Having said so much, he ordered the priests to bring Apis. And indeed, they went to fetch him. This Apis, who is called Epaphus, is a calf born from a cow, which is no longer able to conceive and bear another offspring. The Egyptians say that a heavenly light comes down upon the cow, and from this, she gives birth to Apis. This calf, called Apis, has the following markings: being black, with a white triangle on its forehead, an eagle-like shape on its back, double hairs on its tail, and a beetle under its tongue.
But when the priests brought Apis, Cambyses, being somewhat mad, drew his dagger, wanting to strike the belly of Apis, hit the thigh. And laughing, he said to the priests, "O wretched heads, such gods are made, bloody and fleshy and struck by iron? This god is indeed worthy of the Egyptians, but you will not rejoice in making me a laughingstock." Having said this, he ordered those who do these things to whip the priests, and to kill the other Egyptians whom they might catch celebrating. The festival indeed was dissolved for the Egyptians, and the priests were being punished, and Apis, having been struck in the thigh, was perishing, lying in the temple. And when he had died from the wound, the priests secretly buried him without Cambyses' knowledge.
Cambyses, as the Egyptians say, immediately went mad because of this injustice, not being sane even before. And first of the evils, he killed his brother Smerdis, who was of the same father and mother, whom he sent away to the Persians from Egypt out of jealousy, because he alone of the Persians was able to draw the bow as far as two fingerbreadths, which the Fish-eaters brought from Ethiopia, while none of the other Persians were able to do so. So when Smerdis went to Persia, Cambyses saw a vision in his sleep like this: it seemed to him that a messenger came from the Persians to announce that Smerdis, sitting on the royal throne, would touch the sky with his head. Therefore, fearing these things for himself, lest his brother kill him and rule, he sends Prexaspes to Persia, who was his most trusted man among the Persians, to kill him. And he, going up to Susa, killed Smerdis, some say having led him out to hunt, others having led him out to the Red Sea to drown him.
First, indeed, they say that Cambyses began with this evil: secondly, he married his sister who accompanied him to Egypt, with whom he lived as husband and wife, and she was his sister from both parents. He married her in this way: for the Persians were not accustomed to marrying their sisters before. Cambyses fell in love with one of his sisters, and then, wanting to marry her, since it was not customary, he thought to do it, and asked the royal judges, calling them, if there is any law commanding to live with a sister as husband and wife. The royal judges are chosen men among the Persians, until they die or some injustice is found in them, up to this point: these men judge cases for the Persians and become interpreters of the ancestral laws, and everything is referred to them. So when Cambyses asked, they answered him both justly and safely, saying that they find no law commanding a brother to live with a sister as husband and wife, but they have found another law, that it is allowed for the king of the Persians to do whatever he wants. Thus, fearing Cambyses, they neither broke the law, so that they themselves would not be destroyed, bending the law, nor did they find another law as an ally for the one wanting to marry his sister. Then indeed Cambyses married the one he loved, but not much time after he had another sister. It was the younger of these sisters who accompanied him to Egypt that he killed.
Concerning her death, there are two different stories told, just as there are about Smerdis' death. The Greeks say that Cambyses arranged a fight between a lion cub and a puppy, and this woman was watching. When the puppy was being defeated, its brother broke free from its leash and came to help, and thus the two puppies overcame the cub. Cambyses, watching, was pleased, but the woman who was present wept. When Cambyses learned this, he asked her why she was crying, and she said that seeing the puppy avenge its brother made her weep, remembering Smerdis and knowing that there would be no one to avenge him. The Greeks say that for this reason she was killed by Cambyses. The Egyptians, however, say that while they were sitting at a table, the woman took a lettuce, stripped it of its leaves, and asked her husband whether the lettuce was more beautiful stripped or with leaves. He said that it was more beautiful with leaves, and she said, "Yet you have stripped the house of Cyrus as bare as this lettuce." Angered by this, he attacked her, and she, being pregnant, miscarried and died.
These things, indeed, Cambyses raged against his own household, whether truly because of Apis or also otherwise, as many evils are accustomed to seize humans: for Cambyses is said to have a certain great disease from birth, which some call sacred. Now, indeed, it was not unseemly for the body suffering from a great disease to not have a healthy mind.
These things, indeed, he raged against the other Persians. For it is said that he spoke to Prexaspes, whom he honored most and who oversaw his messages, and this man's son was a cupbearer to Cambyses, which was no small honor. And he is said to have spoken these things: "Prexaspes, what kind of man do the Persians think I am, and what kind of words do they make about me?" And he said, "O master, they praise you greatly in all other things, but they say that you are too fond of wine." And indeed, he spoke these things about the Persians, but Cambyses, becoming angry, answered thus: "Now, indeed, the Persians say that I, being fond of wine, am mad and not wise: nor, indeed, were their former words true." For indeed, earlier, when the Persians were sitting together with Croesus, Cambyses asked what kind of man they thought he was compared to his father Cyrus, and they answered that he was better than his father: for he had all his possessions and had acquired Egypt and the sea. The Persians said these things, but Croesus, being present and not pleased with the judgment, said to Cambyses these things: "To me, indeed, now, O son of Cyrus, you do not seem to be like your father: for indeed, there is not yet a son for you such as he left behind in you." And Cambyses was pleased, hearing these things, and praised the judgment of Croesus.
Remembering these things, indeed, in anger he spoke to Prexaspes: "Now, learn whether the Persians speak the truth or whether they themselves, saying these things, are out of their minds: for if, indeed, I should shoot and hit the heart of your son standing here in the porch, the Persians would appear to be saying nothing: but if I miss, it would appear that the Persians speak the truth and that I am not in my right mind." And having said these things and having stretched the bow, he shot the boy, and when the boy fell, he ordered him to be opened up and the wound to be examined: and when the arrow was found to be in the heart, he said to the father of the boy, laughing and becoming very happy, "Prexaspes, as I am not mad and the Persians are out of their minds, it has become clear to you. Now, tell me, what man have you seen so far among all men who shoots so accurately?" And Prexaspes, seeing a man who was not in his right mind and fearing for himself, said, "Master, I do not even think that a god could shoot so accurately." Then, indeed, he accomplished these things, but on another occasion, having taken twelve Persians similar to the first ones for no justifiable reason, he buried them alive headfirst.
And these things indeed, Croesus the Lydian, thinking it right, reproached him with these words: "O king, do not entrust everything to youth and passion, but hold back and restrain yourself: it is good to have some forethought, and wisdom is in planning ahead. You, indeed, kill men who are your fellow citizens, having taken them for no justifiable reason, and you kill boys. If you do many such things, see how the Persians will not revolt against you. And your father Cyrus commanded me, ordering me to advise you and to suggest whatever good thing I might find." He, indeed, showing goodwill, advised him these things: but he answered with these words. "You dare to advise me, who managed your own country well, and advised my father well, urging him to cross the Araxes river and go against the Massagetae, when they wanted to cross over to our land, and you destroyed yourself by standing badly in your own country, and you destroyed Cyrus by persuading him, but I am not rejoicing, since I have long desired to find a pretext against you." And having said these things, he took the bow as if to shoot him, but Croesus, having run up, fled outside. And when he was not able to shoot, he ordered his attendants to take him and kill him. But the attendants, knowing his character, hid Croesus for this reason, so that, if indeed Cambyses should change his mind and seek Croesus, they would reveal him and receive gifts for saving Croesus' life, but if he should not change his mind nor long for him, then they would use him. And indeed, Cambyses longed for Croesus not much later in time, and the attendants, having learned this, announced to him that he was still alive. And Cambyses said that he was glad that Croesus was still alive, but those who had saved him would not go unpunished but be killed: and he did these things.
Indeed, he often acted irrationally towards the Persians and their allies, staying in Memphis and opening ancient tombs and examining the dead. Thus, he also went to the temple of Hephaestus and laughed much at the statue. For the statue of Hephaestus is very similar to the Phoenician Pataici, which the Phoenicians carry around on the prows of their triremes. And for those who have not seen them, I will describe them: they are imitations of a dwarf man. He also entered the temple of the Cabeiri, into which it is not lawful for anyone else to enter except the priest; and he burned these statues, mocking them greatly. And these statues are also similar to those of Hephaestus; and they say that they are his children.
In every way, then, it is clear to me that Cambyses was greatly insane; for he would not have attempted to mock sacred things and customs. For if someone were to command all people to choose the best laws from all the laws, having considered them, each would choose their own; so much do they believe their own laws to be the best. Therefore, it is not likely that anyone other than a madman would ridicule such things. And as all people have established customs concerning laws, there are many other proofs to consider, and indeed in this one. Darius, during his own reign, asked the Greeks who were present for what amount of money they would be willing to eat their deceased fathers; and they said they would do this for no amount. Then Darius, after this, asked the Indians called Callatiae, who eat their parents, in the presence of the Greeks and through an interpreter learning the words, for what amount of money they would be willing to burn their fathers with fire when they died; and they cried out loudly, urging him to speak well. Thus, these things have been established, and it seems to me that Pindar rightly made the claim that custom is the king of all.
While Cambyses was making a campaign against Egypt, the Lacedaemonians also made a campaign against Samos and Polycrates, the son of Aeaces, who had revolted and taken Samos, and at first, having divided the city into three parts, he assigned it to his brothers Pantagnotus and Syloson. But after killing one of them and driving out the younger Syloson, he held all of Samos. And having formed a guest-friendship with Amasis, the king of Egypt, he made an agreement, sending gifts and receiving others from him. In a short time, the affairs of Polycrates grew and he was greatly renowned throughout Ionia and the rest of Greece; for wherever he directed his army, everything went prosperously for him. He had one hundred fifty ships and a thousand archers, and he carried out and led all, making no distinction; for he said that he would rather please his friend by giving back what he had taken than not taking it in the first place. He indeed took possession of many islands and many cities on the mainland; and having defeated the Lesbians who had come to help the Milesians in a naval battle, he captured them, and they dug the entire trench around the wall in Samos, being bound.
And indeed, the great fortune of Polycrates did not escape the notice of Amasis, but he was very concerned about it. And as his fortune grew even more, he wrote these things in a scroll and sent it to Samos: "Amasis says this to Polycrates: It is pleasant to learn that a friend and guest is doing well, but your great successes do not please me, knowing that the divine is envious. And indeed, I desire both for myself and for those I care for, that some of their affairs should be successful and some should fail, and thus, alternating, they should spend their lives, rather than being successful in everything. For I know of no one, by hearsay, who, having been successful in everything, did not end badly in the end. Now, obeying me, do this in response to your successes: having considered what you find to be of the greatest value and for the loss of which you would grieve most in your soul, cast it away in such a way that it will no longer come to men; and if from this point on your successes are not already alternating with misfortunes, listen to the advice given by me."
Having considered these things, Polycrates, understanding that Amasis was giving him good advice, sought out which of his possessions he would be most grieved to lose. In his search, he found this: he had a seal ring, bound in gold, with an emerald stone, and it was the work of Theodorus, the son of Telecles of Samos. So, when he decided to cast this away, he did the following: having filled a fifty-oared ship with men, he boarded it, and then ordered them to sail out to the open sea. When they were far from the island, he took off the seal ring, with all the shipmates watching, and threw it into the sea. Having done this, he sailed back, and upon arriving at his home, he used misfortune.
On the fifth or sixth day after these events, the following happened to him. A fisherman caught a large and beautiful fish and thought it worthy to be given as a gift to Polycrates. So, carrying it to the doors of Polycrates, he said he wished to come into his presence, and when he was allowed to do so, he gave the fish, saying, "O king, having caught this fish, I did not think it right to take it to the market, although I live by my hands, but it seemed to me worthy of you and your rule; so I bring it to you as a gift." Polycrates, pleased with his words, replied thus, "You have done very well, and I owe you double thanks, both for your words and for the gift, and I invite you to dinner." The fisherman, greatly valuing these things, went to his house, while the servants, cutting up the fish, found Polycrates' seal ring inside its belly. As soon as they saw and took it, they brought it rejoicing to Polycrates, and giving him the seal ring, they told him in what way it had been found. Polycrates, thinking the matter to be divine, wrote down everything he had done and how it had turned out, and having written it, he sent it to Egypt.
And having read the letter from Polycrates, Amasis learned that it was impossible for a man to remove another man from the future event that was to happen, and that Polycrates, who was fortunate in everything and even found what he had thrown away, would not end well. And he sent a herald to Samos to dissolve the friendship, for this reason he did these things, so that he himself would not suffer in his soul when a terrible and great misfortune befell Polycrates, as if it were about a foreign man.
So then, the Lacedaemonians waged war against this Polycrates, who was fortunate in all things, being called upon by the Samians who later founded Cydonia in Crete. And Polycrates, having secretly sent a herald to Cambyses, the son of Cyrus, who was gathering an army against Egypt, asked in what way he might also send help to himself, requesting an army from Samos. And Cambyses, having heard these things, eagerly sent a message to Samos, asking Polycrates to send a naval force together with him against Egypt. And he, having chosen from the citizens those whom he most suspected of plotting a rebellion, sent them away in forty triremes, having instructed Cambyses not to send these men back afterward.
Those indeed say that the Samians sent away by Polycrates did not reach Egypt, but when they were sailing and came to Carpathus, they discussed among themselves and decided it was pleasant not to sail any further. But others say that they arrived in Egypt and, being guarded there, they escaped. Sailing back to Samos, they encountered Polycrates' ships and engaged in battle: the returning Samians, having won, disembarked on the island, but having fought on foot, they were defeated, and thus they sailed to Lacedaemon. There are some who say that the Samians from Egypt defeated Polycrates, but to me, it seems not right: for there was no need for them to call upon the Lacedaemonians if they themselves were able to stand against Polycrates. Moreover, it is not logical that Polycrates, who had many hired soldiers and archers, would be defeated by a few returning Samians. Polycrates gathered the children and wives of his citizens into the boathouses and held them ready, in case these men betrayed him to the returning Samians, to set fire to them and the boathouses.
And when the Samians, who were expelled by Polycrates, arrived in Sparta, standing before the rulers, they spoke many things as they were in great need. But the Spartans, in their first response, said that they had forgotten the first things spoken and did not understand the last. Then, after this, the Samians stood before them a second time, and they said nothing else, but carrying a sack, they claimed that the sack needed flour. And the Spartans responded that even mentioning "the sack" was too much, but they decided to help them.
And then, having prepared, the Lacedaemonians campaigned against Samos, as the Samians say, paying off a favor, because they themselves had earlier helped them with ships against the Messenians; but as the Lacedaemonians say, they did not campaign so much to avenge the needy Samians as to exact retribution for the theft of the bowl, which they were taking to Croesus, and of the breastplate, which Amasis, the king of Egypt, had sent as a gift to them. For the Samians had stolen the breastplate in the previous year before the bowl, being made of linen and adorned with many embroidered animals, and decorated with gold and cotton from wood; and on account of these things, it was worthy of admiration, as each fine thread of the breastplate was made: for being thin, it had 360 strands within itself, all visible. Such is the other one that Amasis dedicated to Athena in Lindus.
And the Corinthians eagerly joined the expedition against Samos, for they had suffered an outrage from the Samians a generation earlier than this expedition, and at the same time as the theft of the bowl. For Periander, the son of Cypselus, had sent 300 sons of the leading men of Corcyra to Sardis to be made eunuchs; and when the Corinthians who were conveying the boys arrived at Samos, the Samians, having learned the reason for which they were being taken to Sardis, first instructed the boys to take sanctuary in the temple of Artemis. Then, not allowing the suppliants to be taken from the temple, and while the Corinthians were trying to starve the boys, the Samians held a festival, which they still observe in the same manner. For when night came, as long as the boys were supplicating, they established choruses of maidens and young men, and having established the choruses, they made it a custom to carry around cakes made of sesame and honey, so that the sons of the Corcyraeans might snatch them and have food. And this continued until the Corinthian guards of the boys departed, having left them behind; and the Samians took the boys and brought them to Corcyra.
If indeed after the death of Periander, the Corinthians were friendly towards the Corcyraeans, they would not have joined the expedition against Samos for this reason. But now, ever since they colonized the island, they are at odds with each other, being related to themselves... Because of these things, the Corinthians held a grudge against the Samians.
And Periander sent to Sardis for the cutting off of the firstborn of the Corcyraeans, having chosen the sons as a punishment; for the Corcyraeans were the first to begin a reckless deed against him.
For after Periander killed his own wife Melissa, another such misfortune happened to him concerning his offspring. He had two sons from Melissa, one seventeen and the other eighteen years old. Their maternal grandfather Procles, being the tyrant of Epidaurus, sent for them to stay with him and treated them kindly, as they were the children of his daughter. But when he sent them away, he said to them as they were leaving, 'Do you know, children, who killed your mother?' The older of the two paid no attention to this remark, but the younger, whose name was Lycophron, was so grieved by it that when he returned to Corinth, he neither spoke to his father, the murderer of his mother, nor answered him when he was spoken to, nor gave any response when he was asked a question. Finally, Periander, being greatly vexed, drove him out of the house. Having driven him out, he asked the older son what their grandfather had said to them. The boy told him that Procles had received them kindly, but he did not remember the remark Procles had made when sending them away, as he had not taken it to heart. Periander said that it was impossible for Procles not to have said something to them, and he questioned him persistently. The boy then remembered and told him. Periander, understanding the situation and not wanting to appear weak, sent a messenger to the people with whom his banished son was staying, forbidding them to receive him into their houses. When the boy was driven away and went to another house, he was driven out of that one too, as Periander threatened those who took him in and ordered them to turn him away. The boy would then go to another of his friends, who, although they were afraid, still received him because he was Periander's son.
At last, Periander made a proclamation that whoever should either receive him into their houses or converse with him would owe a sacred penalty to Apollo, specifying the amount. Therefore, due to this proclamation, no one was willing to either speak with him or receive him into their houses. Moreover, the boy himself did not think it right to attempt what was forbidden, but enduring it, he slept in the porticoes. On the fourth day, Periander, seeing him dirty and starving, took pity on him. Overcoming his anger, he approached him and said, "Oh child, which of these is more preferable, to continue in this present state or to accept the tyranny and the good things that I now possess, being the son of your father and inheriting these things, while being my son and the king of prosperous Corinth, you have chosen a wandering life, opposing and being angry with the one you least ought to be. For if some misfortune has occurred, from which you have suspicion against me, it has happened to me as well, and I am the greater partaker of it, as much as I myself have brought it about. But you, learning how much better it is to be envied than pitied, and how wrong it is to be angry with your parents and those who are stronger than you, go back to the house." With these words, Periander tried to persuade him. But the boy did not answer his father in any other way, saying only that he owed a sacred penalty to the god for coming to converse with him. When Periander learned that the boy's stubbornness was an intractable and invincible evil, he sent him away from his sight, sending a ship to Corcyra, for he ruled over this place as well. After sending him away, Periander made war against his father-in-law Procles, as the one most responsible for the present troubles, and he captured Epidaurus, captured Procles himself, and took him prisoner.
As time went on, Periander grew older and realized that he was no longer able to manage and oversee his affairs. So, he sent a message to Corcyra, inviting Lycophron to take over the tyranny, for he did not yet see potential in his elder son, who seemed to be slow-witted. But Lycophron did not even deem the messenger worthy of a response. Periander, being troubled by his son's youth, sent his sister, his own daughter, to him, thinking that he would be most likely to be persuaded by her. When she arrived and spoke to him, she said, "My child, do you wish for the tyranny to fall into the hands of others and the house of your father to be destroyed, rather than to go away and possess it yourself? Go back to the house and cease punishing yourself. Ambition is a worthless possession. Do not cure evil with evil. Many of the just prefer what is more fitting, and many have already thrown away their paternal inheritance while seeking their maternal one. Tyranny is a dangerous thing, and many are its lovers, but your father is already old and has aged. Do not give your own good things to others." Having been taught the most persuasive arguments by her father, she spoke these words to him. But he, replying, said that he would never come to Corinth as long as he knew his father was still alive. When she reported this back, Periander sent a herald for the third time, wishing to come to Corcyra himself, and he ordered Lycophron to come to Corinth and become the successor of the tyranny. When the boy agreed to these terms, Periander prepared to go to Corcyra, and the boy prepared to go to Corinth. But when the Corcyraeans learned of each of these things, in order that Periander might not come to their land, they killed the young man. In return for these actions, Periander took revenge on the Corcyraeans.
The Lacedaemonians, when they arrived with a great force, besieged Samos. And attacking the wall, they mounted the tower standing by the sea, in the suburb of the city; but after Polycrates came to their aid with a large force, they were driven off. As for the upper tower, which was on the ridge of the mountain, both the mercenaries and many Samians themselves went forth against it. And receiving the Lacedaemonians for a short time, they fled backward, while the others pursued, causing great destruction.
If indeed now the present Lacedaemonians had become like Archias and Lycopas on that day, Samos would have been captured: for Archias and Lycopas alone, having fallen together, fled to the wall with the Samians and, having been cut off from the road behind, died in the city of the Samians. And being the third from this Archias, I myself was with another Archias, the Samian, son of Archias, in Pitana (for he was of this district), who honored the Samians most of all foreigners and said that the name Samian had been given to his father because his father, Archias, had died in Samos after having been most distinguished: and he said he honored the Samians because his grandfather had been buried publicly by the Samians.
And the Lacedaemonians, when forty days had passed for them besieging Samos and nothing of their affairs advanced forward, they departed to the Peloponnese. And as the more foolish tale is set in motion, it is said that Polycrates, having struck a great amount of lead, gilded it as local currency and gave it to them, and they, having received it, thus indeed departed. This was the first expedition the Dorian Lacedaemonians made into Asia.
But those who had fought against Polycrates of Samos, when the Lacedaemonians were about to leave them, they themselves sailed away to Siphnus, for they were in need of money, and the affairs of the Siphnians were flourishing at that time, and they were the wealthiest of the islanders, as they had gold and silver mines in their island, so that from the tenth of the money made there, a treasure is laid up in Delphi, equal to the richest; and they distributed the money made each year among themselves. So when they were making the treasure, they consulted the oracle as to whether the present good things were likely to remain with them for a long time, and the Pythia gave them this answer: "But when in Siphnus the town hall becomes white and the white-browed market, then indeed it is necessary for a wise man to guard against a wooden force and a red herald." And at that time, the market and the town hall of the Siphnians were adorned with Parian stone.
This oracle they were not able to understand, neither at once nor when the Samians had arrived. For as soon as the Samians came near to Siphnus, they sent one of their ships, carrying ambassadors, to the city. Now all the ships were painted with red vermilion, and this was what the Pythia had foretold to the Siphnians, advising them to guard against the wooden force and the red herald. So when the ambassadors arrived, they asked the Siphnians to lend them ten talents; but the Siphnians, saying they would not lend, the Samians began to plunder their lands. And when the Siphnians heard of it, they came to help and, engaging with them, were defeated, and many of them were cut off from their city by the Samians, who afterwards exacted from them a hundred talents.
From the people of Hermione, the Samians received the island of Hydrea, instead of money, which is near the Peloponnesus, and they entrusted it to the people of Troezen. Then they themselves founded Cydonia in Crete, not sailing for this purpose, but to drive out the Zacynthians from the island. They remained there and prospered for five years, so that the temples in Cydonia that exist now were made by them, as well as the temple of Dictyna. But in the sixth year, the Aeginetans, having defeated them in a naval battle, enslaved them along with the Cretans, and having cut off the prows of the ships, which had the shape of boars' heads, they dedicated them in the temple of Athena in Aegina. The Aeginetans did this, having a grudge against the Samians: for earlier, when Amphicrates was ruling in Samos, the Samians, having campaigned against Aegina, had done great harm to the Aeginetans and had suffered at their hands. This was the cause.
I have written at length about the Samians, for they have accomplished three of the greatest works among all the Greeks: a tunnel through the base of a high mountain, 150 and 100 fathoms in height, with entrances at both ends. The length of the tunnel is seven stadia, and its height and width are eight feet each. Throughout its entirety, another tunnel has been dug, twenty cubits deep and three feet wide, through which water is channeled through pipes and brought to the city from a large spring. The architect of this tunnel was Eupalinus, son of Naustrophus, a Megarian. This is one of the three works; the second is a breakwater in the sea surrounding the harbor, twenty fathoms deep and more than two stadia in length. The third work they have accomplished is the largest temple of all the temples we know, with Rhoecus, son of Philes, a native, as its first architect. It is for these reasons that I have written more about the Samians.
While Cambyses, son of Cyrus, was delayed in Egypt and had lost his mind, two Magian brothers rose up against him, one of whom had been left by Cambyses to oversee his household. This man, learning of Smerdis' death and how it was kept secret, and that only a few Persians knew about it while many believed he was still alive, devised the following plan to seize the royal power. He had a brother who closely resembled Smerdis, son of Cyrus, who had been killed by his own brother, Cambyses. This brother was not only similar in appearance to Smerdis, but also had the same name, Smerdis. The Magus, Patizeithes, having persuaded this man that he would manage everything for him, brought him to the royal throne. Having done this, he sent heralds to the other regions, and indeed to Egypt, where the army was advancing, announcing that they should henceforth obey Smerdis, son of Cyrus, and not Cambyses.
So then, the other heralds proclaimed these things, and indeed the one sent to Egypt, for he found Cambyses and the army being in Ecbatana of Syria, proclaimed standing in the middle the things commanded by the Magus. And Cambyses, having heard these things from the herald and having hoped that he spoke the truth, himself having been betrayed by Prexaspes (for he had sent him to kill Smerdis and did not do these things), looking at Prexaspes said, "Prexaspes, did you thus carry out for me the matter which I entrusted to you?" And he said, "O master, these things are not true, that ever your brother Smerdis rose up against you, nor that ever any strife will be for you from that man, either great or small: for I myself, having done the things you commanded me, buried him with my own hands. If now the dead rise up, expect indeed also Astyages the Mede to rise up against you: but if it is as before, no newer thing will sprout up for you from him. Now then, it seems to me, having pursued the herald, to examine by asking from whom, coming, he proclaims to us to listen to King Smerdis."
Upon Prexaspes saying these things, which pleased Cambyses, the herald was immediately pursued and brought back. Then Prexaspes asked him the following: "Man, you say you have come as a messenger from Smerdis, the son of Cyrus. Now then, tell the truth and go away rejoicing: whether Smerdis himself appeared to you and ordered these things, or one of his servants did." And he said, "I have not seen Smerdis, the son of Cyrus, since King Cambyses marched into Egypt; but the Magus, whom Cambyses appointed as steward of his household, received me, and he ordered these things, saying that it was Smerdis, the son of Cyrus, who wanted me to say these things to you." He spoke to them without any falsehood, and Cambyses said, "Prexaspes, you, being a good man, have done what was commanded and have escaped blame. But who among the Persians would rise up against me, using the name of Smerdis?" And he said, "I think I understand this event, O king: the rebels are the Magi, Patizeithes, whom you left as steward of your household, and his brother Smerdis."
Upon hearing the name Smerdis, the truth of the words and the dream struck Cambyses. In the dream, he saw Smerdis sitting on the royal throne, touching the sky with his head. Having realized that he had killed his brother for no reason, Cambyses wept for Smerdis. Having wept and being overwhelmed by the entire misfortune, he intended to mount his horse, with the intention of hastening to Susa to wage war against the Magus. And as he was mounting his horse, the cap of his sword's sheath fell off, and the exposed blade struck his thigh. Having been wounded in the same spot where he had once struck the Egyptian god Apis, which he thought was a timely injury, Cambyses asked what the name of the city was. They said that it was Ecbatana. He had previously been told by an oracle from the city of Buto that he would end his life in Ecbatana. Indeed, he thought he would end his life as an old man in the Median Ecbatana, where all his affairs were. But the oracle apparently spoke of the Ecbatana in Syria. And so, as he then inquired about the name of the city, he came to his senses due to the misfortune that had befallen him from the Magus and the wound, and having understood the divine prophecy, he said, "Here, Cambyses, the son of Cyrus, is destined to die."
At that time, indeed so much. But about twenty days later, having summoned the most important Persians present, he said these things to them: "O Persians, it has come upon me, the most hidden of all matters, to reveal this to you. For being in Egypt, I saw a vision in my sleep, which I wish I had never seen: it seemed to me that a messenger came from the house to announce that Smerdis, sitting on the royal throne, would touch the sky with his head. Fearing that I would be deprived of my rule by my brother, I acted more quickly than wisely: for in human nature it was not possible, it seems, to avert what was going to happen. But I, the foolish one, sent Prexaspes to Susa to kill Smerdis. Having accomplished such a terrible deed without fear, I lived, never considering that another Smerdis might rise up against me after the one who had been removed. But having missed everything that was going to happen, I have become a fratricide without need and have been deprived of the kingdom no less: for it was indeed the Magus Smerdis that the divine power showed me in the vision as going to rise up. This deed has been accomplished by me, and you should no longer consider Smerdis, the son of Cyrus, as being among you: the Magi hold your royal power, the one I left as steward of the house and his brother Smerdis. Now, it was most necessary for me to avenge myself on the Magi for the disgrace I have suffered, but this man has died an unholy death at the hands of his own closest family. With him no longer being here, it is most necessary for you, O Persians, to be commanded by me to do what I wish to be done at the end of my life: and indeed I entrust these things to you, calling upon the gods of the royal house and all of you, and especially the Achaemenids present, not to see the rule pass back to the Medes, but whether they hold it having acquired it by deceit, to be taken away from them by you through deceit, or whether they have accomplished it by their own strength, to be saved by strength according to the strongest. And may the earth bring forth fruit for you and your women and flocks give birth, being free for all time: but for those who have not saved the rule nor attempted to save it, may the opposite of these things happen to you, and in addition to these things, may the end come to each Persian as it has come to me." Having said these things, Cambyses wept for all his own actions.
And when the Persians saw their king weeping, they all held their garments and tore them, and they were filled with abundant lamentation. But after this, as the bone was consumed and the thigh quickly decayed, Cambyses, the son of Cyrus, was carried away, having ruled in total for seven years and five months, and being entirely without children, both male and female offspring. And for the Persians who were present, great disbelief had poured forth that the Magi held the affairs, but it was thought that Cambyses said what he said about the death of Smerdis with deceit, so that all of the Persian people would be led to wage war against him.
These people indeed now believed that Smerdis, the son of Cyrus, was the reigning king. For Prexaspes vehemently denied killing Smerdis, as it was not safe for him to reveal that he had killed the son of Cyrus with his own hands after Cambyses' death. And so, the Magus ruled without fear after Cambyses' death, pretending to be Smerdis, the son of Cyrus, for the remaining seven months until the completion of the eight years. During this time, he received great acts of kindness from all his subjects, so that after his death, all the people in Asia, except the Persians, longed for him. For the Magus, having sent messages to every nation he ruled, announced a three-year exemption from military service and taxes.
He indeed announced these things immediately upon taking power, and in the eighth month he became evident in this way. Otanes was the son of Pharnaspes, and by birth and wealth he was equal to the foremost Persians. This Otanes first suspected the Magus, that he was not Smerdis, the son of Cyrus, but who he really was, considering that he did not go out from the citadel and that he did not call any of the notable Persians to see him. Having suspected him, he did these things. Cambyses had his daughter, whose name was Phaedyme; this same woman the Magus had then, and he lived with her and all the other wives of Cambyses. So Otanes sent to this daughter and inquired from which man she slept, whether with Smerdis, the son of Cyrus, or with another. And she sent back word, saying she did not know, for she had never seen Smerdis, the son of Cyrus, nor did she know who the man was that lived with her. Otanes sent a second time, saying, "If you yourself do not know Smerdis, the son of Cyrus, then inquire from Atossa with whom this man lives, both she and you; for surely she knows her own brother." The daughter sent back in response to these things, "I am not able to come into conversation with Atossa, nor to see any other of the women who live together. For as soon as this man, whoever he is, took the kingship, he separated us, assigning each to a different place."
Upon hearing these things, Otanes understood the matter more clearly. He sent a third message to his daughter, saying these words: "My daughter, being of noble birth, you must undertake any risk that your father may command. For if this man is not Smerdis, the son of Cyrus, but the one whom I suspect, he must not be allowed to sleep with you and hold the power of the Persians without facing punishment. Therefore, do this: when he sleeps beside you and you know him to be asleep, feel his ears. If he appears to have ears, consider yourself to be living with Smerdis, the son of Cyrus; but if he does not have ears, then you are with Smerdis the Magus." In response to this, Phaedyme said that she would be taking a great risk if she were to do this; for if he happened not to have ears and she were caught feeling for them, she knew well that he would punish her. Nevertheless, she agreed to do this. Now this Magus, Smerdis, had his ears cut off by Cyrus, the son of Cambyses, for some significant reason. So Phaedyme, the daughter of Otanes, carried out everything she had promised her father. When it was her turn to be with the Magus (for the Persian women indeed visit their husbands in rotation), she went to him and, while the Magus was soundly asleep, she felt his ears. Having discovered without difficulty that the man did not have ears, she sent word to her father as soon as day had come about what had happened.
And so Otanes, having taken Aspathines and Gobryas, who were both foremost among the Persians and most trusted by him, disclosed the whole matter to them. They themselves, indeed, had already suspected that this was the case, and when Otanes brought forth his words, they accepted them, and it seemed good to them that each man should bring into their company the one whom he trusted most among the Persians. Now then, Otanes introduces Intaphrenes, Gobryas brings in Megabyzus, and Aspathines brings Hydarnes. And when these six had come together, Darius, the son of Hystaspes, arrived in Susa from Persia, for his father was indeed a governor among them. And so, when he arrived, it seemed good to the six Persians to also include Darius in their company.
These seven men, having come together, exchanged pledges and discussed their plans. And when it came to Darius to express his opinion, he said to them the following: "I myself thought that I alone knew that the Magus was the king and that Smerdis, the son of Cyrus, was dead; and for this very reason, I have come in haste to plot the death of the Magus. But since it has happened that you also know and not only me, I think we should act immediately and not delay; for there is nothing better." To this, Otanes said, "O son of Hystaspes, you are the son of a good father, and you seem to show yourself to be no less than your father; however, do not hasten this undertaking so thoughtlessly, but take it to the more prudent course; for it is necessary to have more people in order to undertake it." Darius replied to this, "Men who are present, if you will use the manner spoken of by Otanes, know that you will perish most miserably; for someone will go to the Magus, seeking to gain advantages for himself. Now, you should have done these things relying on yourselves; but since it seemed good to you to refer it to more people and to involve me as well, either let us do it today or know that if today passes by, no one else will be the accuser before me, but I myself will reveal you to the Magus."
Seeing Darius' determination, Otanes replied, "Since you compel us to act quickly and do not allow any delay, tell us yourself in what manner we may enter the palace and confront them. For indeed you know, if not by seeing, then by hearing, that there are guards stationed all around. How shall we pass them?" Darius answered, "Otanes, there are many things which cannot be made clear in words, but only in deeds; and there are others which can be explained in words, but no great result comes from them. You know that it is not difficult to pass the stationed guards. For being such as we are, no one will not let us pass, either out of respect for us or out of fear. I myself have the most plausible pretext for entering: I will say that I have just arrived from Persia and wish to deliver a message from my father to the king. For where it is necessary to tell a lie, let it be told. For we are aiming at the same thing, both those who lie and those who tell the truth. The liars lie in order to persuade with their lies and gain something, while the truth-tellers speak the truth in order to draw some advantage to themselves and have something entrusted to them. Thus, using different means, we are both aiming at the same thing. If they were not going to gain anything, the truth-teller would be as willing to lie as the liar would be to tell the truth. Now, whoever of the gatekeepers willingly lets us pass, it will be better for him in the future; but whoever tries to oppose us, let him be shown here as an enemy, and then, having pushed our way in, let us begin our work."
Gobryas spoke after this, "Dear friends, when will it be better for us to recover the rule, or if indeed we are not able to take it back, to die? For now, being Persians, we are ruled by a Mede, a Magus, and this man without ears. And as many of you who were present with Cambyses when he was sick, surely you remember the curse he placed upon the Persians at the end of his life if they did not attempt to regain the rule: we did not accept those things then, but we thought Cambyses spoke to deceive us. Now, therefore, I propose that we obey Darius and not disperse from this assembly, but go straight against the Magus." Gobryas said these things, and everyone praised this course of action.
While they were deliberating these matters, a coincidental event happened. The Magi, in their counsel, decided to add Prexaspes as a friend, both because he had suffered wrongs at the hands of Cambyses, who had shot his son with an arrow and killed him, and because he alone knew the death of Smerdis, son of Cyrus, having killed him with his own hand, and furthermore, because Prexaspes was held in the highest esteem among the Persians. For these reasons, having summoned him, they sought to gain his friendship, taking both trust and oaths from him, that he would keep the deception that had come from them to the Persians to himself and not reveal it to any man, promising to give him all things in abundance. And when Prexaspes promised to do these things, as the Magi persuaded him, they brought forth a second proposal, saying that they themselves would gather all the Persians under the royal wall, and they ordered him, having gone up onto a tower, to proclaim that they were ruled by Smerdis, son of Cyrus, and by no one else. And they gave these instructions in such a way as if he were the most trustworthy man among the Persians and had many times shown his opinion that the son of Cyrus, Smerdis, was still alive, and had denied his murder.
When Prexaspes agreed to do this as well, the Magi gathered the Persians and brought him up to a tower, instructing him to speak. However, Prexaspes intentionally ignored the Magi's instructions. He began by recounting the lineage of Cyrus from Achaemenes onwards. When he reached the name of Cyrus, he described all the good that the king had done for Persia. After narrating this, he revealed the truth, explaining that he had kept it hidden before because it wasn't safe for him to disclose what had happened. But now, he felt compelled to reveal it. He confessed that he had killed Smerdis, the son of Cyrus, under Cambyses' orders, and that the Magi were now in power. Then, he called upon a terrible curse on the Persians if they didn't reclaim the throne and take revenge on the Magi. After saying this, he threw himself headfirst from the tower, resulting in his death. Prexaspes, a man who had always been well-regarded, met his end in this manner.
The seven Persians, having resolved to immediately undertake action against the Magi and not to delay, prayed to the gods, knowing nothing of the events concerning Prexaspes. And indeed, as they were walking in the middle of the road, they came to learn about what had happened to Prexaspes. At this point, stepping off the road, they again exchanged words among themselves, some around Otanes strongly urging to hold back and not to engage in the matter without knowing the outcome, while others around Darius insisted on going immediately and carrying out the decided plan without delay. As they were being urged, seven pairs of hawks appeared, chasing two pairs of vultures and both plucking and tearing them apart. Seeing this, the seven Persians all praised Darius' opinion and then went on towards the royal palace, emboldened by the birds.
When they approached the gates, something like Darius' opinion occurred: for the guards, respecting the leading men of the Persians and suspecting nothing of this sort from them, let them pass, using divine guidance, and no one asked questions. Then, when they had also passed into the courtyard, they encountered the eunuchs who brought the messages: these eunuchs questioned them about what they wanted to come for, and at the same time, while questioning them, they threatened the gatekeepers that they had let them pass, and they tried to stop the seven from going further. But having exchanged signals and drawn their daggers, they stabbed these eunuchs who were trying to stop them right there, and they themselves went running towards the men's quarters.
The Magi, at that time, happened to be both inside and discussing the matters arising from Prexaspes' actions. So when they saw the eunuchs in turmoil and shouting, both of them ran up again and, as they learned what was being done, they turned to defense. One of them indeed, taking up the bow, and the other turned to the spear. Then they mingled with each other. For the one who took up the bow, since the enemies were near and pressing, it was of no use; but the other defended himself with the spear and struck Aspathines in the thigh, and Intaphrenes in the eye; and Intaphrenes was deprived of his eye by the wound, but he did not die. One of the Magi wounded these men; the other, since the bow was of no use to him, for there was a chamber leading into the men's quarters, fled into this, wishing to add the doors to it, and two of the seven, Darius and Gobryas, fell in with him. And when Gobryas grappled with the Magus, Darius, standing by, was at a loss what to do in the darkness, considering lest he should strike Gobryas. But when Gobryas saw him standing idle, he asked why he did not use his hand; and he said, "Considering you, lest I should strike." And Gobryas answered, "Push the sword and through both." And Darius, obeying, pushed the dagger and somehow hit the Magus.
And having killed the Magi and cut off their heads, they left their wounded companions there on account of their weakness and the guarding of the citadel; and five of them, holding the heads of the Magi, went forth with shouting and clashing, and they called upon the other Persians, explaining the matter and showing the heads, and at the same time they killed any Magus who happened to be in their path. And the Persians, having learned the deed from the seven and the deceit of the Magi, thought it right to do such things themselves; and having drawn their daggers, they killed any Magus they found: and if night had not come upon them, they would have left no Magus alive. This day the Persians celebrate most commonly of all days, and on it they hold a great festival, which is called by the Persians Magophonia: on this day it is not lawful for any Magus to appear in the light, but the Magi keep themselves in their houses on this day.
After the turmoil had settled and five days had passed, the rebels who had risen against the Magi deliberated about all matters, and some speeches were made which may seem incredible to some Greeks, but they were indeed spoken. Otanes urged to lay down the affairs in the middle of the Persians, saying these things: "It seems to me that one of us should no longer become a sole ruler. For it is neither pleasant nor good. For you saw the arrogance of Cambyses and how far it went, and you have experienced the arrogance of the Magus. How could monarchy be a well-arranged thing, in which it is allowed to do without accountability what one wishes? For even if the best of all men were placed in this position, he would go beyond his usual thoughts. For arrogance comes to him from the good things that are present, and envy is implanted in man from the beginning. Having these two, he has all wickedness: for being filled with arrogance, he does many reckless things, and with envy, others. And yet a tyrant ought to be without envy, having all good things. But the opposite of this is born towards the citizens: for he envies the best of those who go around and live, and rejoices in the worst of the citizens, and he is the best at receiving slander. Most unharmonious of all: for if you moderately admire him, he is angry because he is not greatly attended to, and if someone greatly attends to him, he is angry as if being flattered. But now I come to the greatest things in speaking: he disturbs ancestral customs and violates women and kills without judgment. But the rule of the multitude, first of all, has the most beautiful name of all, equality, and secondly, it does none of these things which the sole ruler does: it rules by lot, and it has accountable rule, and it refers all deliberations to the common people. Therefore, I propose that we, having changed, should exalt the multitude: for in the many, all things are present."
Otanes indeed brought forth this opinion: Megabyzus, however, urged to entrust an oligarchy, saying these things. "Let the things Otanes said, putting an end to tyranny, be spoken also by me; but in urging to bring the power to the multitude, he has missed the best judgment: for there is nothing more foolish and more insolent than an unprofitable crowd. And yet, escaping the insolence of a tyrant, it is by no means tolerable for men to fall into the insolence of an uncontrolled public. For the former, knowing, does what he does, while the latter does not even know: for how could he know, who has neither been taught nor seen anything beautiful and proper, and rushes into affairs without understanding, like a torrential river? Now let those who think evil for the Persians use the public, but let us, having chosen a group of the best men, entrust the power to these: for in these we ourselves will be included, and from the best men, the best counsels are likely to come about."
Megabyzus indeed presented this opinion, and thirdly Darius demonstrated his view, saying, "To me, Megabyzus seems to have spoken correctly about the multitude, but not correctly about the oligarchy. For with three options being proposed, and all of them being the best in theory - the best democracy, oligarchy, and monarchy - I say that this one, monarchy, far surpasses the others. For there is nothing better than a single best man: for with such a judgment, he would govern the multitude faultlessly, and he would keep silent his plans against hostile men most effectively. In an oligarchy, many who strive for excellence cause strong private enmities to arise for the common good: for each one, desiring to be the leader and to prevail in their opinions, they come to great enmities with one another, from which factions arise, and from factions, murder; and from murder, it results in a monarchy, and in this it shows how much this is the best. And again, when the people rule, it is impossible for wickedness not to occur: and so, with wickedness occurring, enmities do not arise among the wicked for the common good, but strong friendships do: for those who are wicked in the common affairs conspire together. And this becomes such that someone from the people stops those like this. And from them, this one is admired by the people, and being admired, he appears to be a monarch, and in this, he shows that monarchy is the strongest. And to say everything in one word, from where did freedom come to us and who gave it? Was it from the people, or from an oligarchy, or from a monarch? I have the opinion that we, having been freed by one man, should surround this, and not dissolve the ancestral laws we have, which are good: for there is nothing better."
Indeed, three opinions were proposed, and four of the seven men added themselves to this one. But when Otanes, seeking equality for the Persians, was defeated in his opinion, he spoke these things to them: "Men who stand together, it is clear that one of us must become king, either by lot, or by the choice of the multitude of Persians, or by some other device. Now, I do not contend with you: for I neither wish to rule nor to be ruled. On this account, I withdraw from the rule, on the condition that I will not be ruled by any of you, neither myself nor those who are always born from me." Having said these things, as the six agreed to these terms, he did not contend with them but stood aside, and now this house alone among the Persians continues to be free and rules as much as it wishes, not transgressing the laws of the Persians.
The remaining ones of the seven were deliberating how they would most justly establish a king; and it seemed good to them that for Otanes and those always born from Otanes, if the kingship should come to any other of the seven, exceptional gifts should be given: Median clothing each year and the most valuable gift that is given among the Persians. They decided to give these things to him for this reason: because he first planned the matter and gathered them together. These things, indeed, were exceptional for Otanes; but they deliberated these things for the common good: that any of the seven who wished could go to the palace without announcement, unless the king happened to be sleeping with a woman, and that it would not be allowed for the king to marry from elsewhere than from those who had conspired together. And they deliberated this concerning the kingship: that when the horse of the sun, rising, should first neigh, while they had mounted in their suburb, this one should have the kingship.
Darius had a wise horse-keeper, a man named Oebares. To this man, after they had dispersed, Darius spoke as follows: "Oebares, we have decided to determine the kingship in this way: when the horse first neighs at the rising sun while we have mounted, that man shall have the kingship. Now then, if you have any cleverness, devise a way that we may gain this prize and not someone else." Oebares answered with these words: "If indeed, master, it is in this matter that you are to be king or not, take courage on this account and have a good spirit, for no one else will be king before you; I have such remedies." Darius said, "If then you have any such clever device, it is time to devise and not to put off, since the contest is for us on the coming day." Hearing this, Oebares did the following: as night came, he took one of the female horses, the one that Darius' horse loved most, and led her to the suburb and tied her up, and then he led Darius' horse and, for the most part, led him close to the female horse, rubbing her against the male; finally, he let the horse mount her.
As day was breaking, the six men arrived on horseback according to their agreement. And as they were riding through the suburb, when they came to this place where the female horse had been tied during the night that had passed, there Darius' horse ran forward and neighed. And at the same time as the horse did this, a flash of lightning and a clap of thunder occurred from a clear sky. These things happening to Darius were fulfilled as if they had been arranged, and the others, dismounting from their horses, bowed to Darius.
Some indeed say that Oebares contrived these things, while others say the following (for both accounts are told by the Persians): that he touched the mare's genitals with his hand and held it hidden in his clothes; and as the horses were about to be released at the same time as the sun was rising, Oebares stretched out his hand towards the nostrils of Darius' horse, and the horse, sensing it, snorted and neighed.
Darius indeed, the son of Hystaspes, had become king, and all in Asia were obedient to him except the Arabians, who had overthrown Cyrus and again later Cambyses. But the Arabians never submitted to slavery to the Persians, but became allies, accompanying Cambyses against Egypt; for without the consent of the Arabians, the Persians could not invade Egypt. And Darius first married the Persians, two daughters of Cyrus, Atossa and Artystone, Atossa having been married to Cambyses her brother and again to the Magus, and Artystone being a virgin; and he married another daughter of Cyrus, Smerdis, whose name was Parmys; and he also had the daughter of Otanes, who made the Magus manifest; and all power was filled by him. First, having made a stone image, he set it up: there was a man, a horseman, and he inscribed letters saying these things: "Darius, the son of Hystaspes, with the excellence of the horse" (I say the name) "and Oebares the groom, gained possession of the kingdom of the Persians."
Having done these things in Persia, he established beginnings as twenty, which they themselves call satrapies. Having established the beginnings and having set rulers over them, he ordered tributes to come to him according to nations and also to the neighboring nations, commanding, and going beyond the neighboring ones, he distributed other nations to others. And he divided the beginnings and the annual income of tributes according to these things. To those who bring silver, it was said to bring a Babylonian weight talent, and to those who bring gold, a Euboic talent. The Babylonian talent is able to have seventy-eight Euboic minae. For during the rule of Cyrus and again Cambyses, there was nothing established about tribute, but they brought gifts. Through this command of tribute and other similar things, the Persians say that Darius was a shopkeeper, Cambyses a master, and Cyrus a father, the one because he made a profit from all the affairs, the other because he was harsh and careless, and the other because he was gentle and devised all good things for them.
From the Ionians, Magnesians in Asia, Aeolians, Carians, Lycians, Milyans, and Pamphylians (for this tribute was assigned to them as one) 400 talents of silver were added. This first province was thus established. From the Mysians, Lydians, Lasonians, Cabalians, and Hytennians, 500 talents: this was the second province. From the Hellespontians on the right as one sails in, Asian Phrygians, Asian Thracians, Paphlagonians, Mariandynians, and Syrians, the tribute was 360 talents: this was the third province. From the Cilicians, 360 white horses, one for each day, and 500 talents of silver: of these, 140 were spent on the horsemen who guarded the Cilician land, and the 360 talents went to Darius: this was the fourth province.
From Posideion city, which Amphilochus son of Amphiaraus founded on the borders of the Cilicians and Syrians, starting from this city up to Egypt, except for the part of the Arabians (for this was free from tax), the tribute was 350 talents. In this province are all of Phoenicia, and Syria called Palestine, and Cyprus: this is the fifth province. From Egypt and the Libyans bordering Egypt, and from Cyrene and Barce (for these were included in the Egyptian province), 700 talents were added, besides the silver that came from the Moeris lake, which was produced from the fish: this silver, separate from the tribute and the measured grain, was 700 talents: for they measure out grain for 120,000 Persians who are settled in the White Wall in Memphis and for their allies. This is the sixth province. The Sattagydae, Gandarii, Dadicae, and Aparutae, being grouped together, contributed 170 talents: this is the seventh province. From Susa and the rest of the Cissian land, 300 talents: this is the eighth province.
From Babylon, and the rest of Assyria, 1,000 talents of silver were added, and 500 castrated boys: this is the ninth province. From Ecbatana, and the rest of Media, and the Paricanians, and the Orthocorybantians, 450 talents: this is the tenth province. The Caspii, Pausicae, Pantimathi, and Daritae, being grouped together, contributed 200 talents: this is the eleventh province.
From the Bactrians, and up to the Aegli territory, 360 talents of tribute were: this is the twelfth province. From the Pactyic region, and Armenians, and the neighboring lands up to the Euxine Sea, 400 talents: this is the thirteenth province. From the Sagartii, and Sarangeis, and Thamanaei, and Utii, and Myci, and those dwelling in the islands in the Red Sea, in which the king settles those called the uprooted, from all these 600 talents were made as tribute: this is the fourteenth province. The Sacae and Caspii, however, brought forth 250 talents: this is the fifteenth province. The Parthians, and Chorasmians, and Sogdi, and Arii, 300 talents: this is the sixteenth province.
The Paricanii and the Ethiopians from Asia brought forth 400 talents: this is the seventeenth province. To the Matieni, and Saspeiri, and Alarodii, 200 talents were appointed: this is the eighteenth province. To the Moschi, and Tibareni, and Macrones, and Mossynoeci, and Mares, 300 talents were prescribed: this is the nineteenth province. The Indians, however, are by far the most numerous of all the people we know, and they brought forth a tribute greater than all the others, 360 talents of gold dust: this is the twentieth province.
Indeed, the Babylonian silver, when compared to the Euboic standard, amounts to 9,880 talents; and the gold, calculated at thirteen times the value of silver, is found to be 4,680 Euboic talents. Therefore, when all these sums are combined, the total annual tribute collected by Darius amounts to 14,560 Euboic talents; in this calculation, I do not mention any amounts less than ten.
This tribute came to Darius from both Asia and parts of Libya. However, as time went on, additional tribute also came from the islands and from those who lived in Europe up to Thessaly. The king stored this tribute in the following manner: he melted it down and poured it into ceramic jars; and when the vessel was full, he removed the clay. And whenever he was in need of money, he would cut off as much as he needed each time.
These were the original governments and tribute impositions. The Persian land alone was not mentioned to me as tribute-bearing; for the Persians inhabit a land free from taxes. These, however, were not ordered to bear any tribute, but brought gifts: the Ethiopians bordering on Egypt, whom Cambyses subdued in his march against the long-lived Ethiopians, those who dwell around the sacred Nysa and celebrate the festivals for Dionysus. These Ethiopians and their neighbors, who use the same seed as the Indian Callantiae and have underground dwellings, brought gifts every third year, and they still bring gifts up to my time, two measures of unrefined gold, two hundred ebony logs, five Ethiopian boys, and twenty large elephant tusks. The Colchians and their neighbors up to the Caucasus mountains (for this mountain is the boundary under Persian rule, and nothing to the north of the Caucasus is cared for by the Persians), these, then, arranged gifts still brought to me every four years, a hundred boys and a hundred girls. The Arabians, however, brought a thousand talents of frankincense every year. These, then, were the gifts brought to the king by these people, in addition to the tribute.
The abundant gold that the Indians, from whom the aforementioned tribute is brought to the king, acquire in this manner: there is sand in the Indian land that lies towards the sun's rising. For of those we know, and about whom some certain report is made, the Indians are the first who dwell towards the east and the sun's rising in Asia. For the eastern part of India is desert because of the sand. There are many tribes of Indians, and they do not all speak the same language, and some of them are nomads and some are not, and some dwell in the marshes of the river and eat raw fish, which they catch from reed boats: one joint of reed makes each boat. These Indians wear clothing of bullrushes: when they have cut the bullrush from the river and have plaited it in a form like a mat, they wear it like a breastplate.
But other Indians, dwelling towards the east of these, are nomads, eaters of raw flesh, and are called Padaei; and they are said to use customs like these: when any of their townspeople, whether it be a woman or a man, becomes sick, the men, especially those who are most intimate with him, kill him, saying that if he wastes away with the disease, their flesh will be ruined for them; but he denies that he is sick, and they do not believe him, and having killed him, they feast upon him. And if a woman becomes sick, in the same way the women who are most intimate with her do the same things as the men. For indeed, having reached old age, they sacrifice and feast upon him; but to this point, not many of them reach, for before that, all who fall into sickness they kill.
But there is another way of life for other Indians: they neither kill any living creature nor sow any crops nor do they consider having houses; and they eat plants and a grain as large as a millet seed, which grows by itself from the earth, and they collect it with its husk, and boil and eat it. And whoever among them falls into sickness, goes into the wilderness and lies down; and no one cares for them, neither when they die nor when they are sick.
The mixing of these Indians, of whom I have spoken, is evident in all respects like that of sheep, and they all bear a color similar and nearly resembling Ethiopians. Their seed, which they release into the women, is not white as it is for other men, but black like their color. And Ethiopians also release such a fluid. These Indians live further away from the Persians and towards the south wind, and they never obeyed King Darius.
Other Indians are near the city of Caspatyrus and the Pactyic country, dwelling to the north and the north wind of the other Indians, who have a way of life similar to the Bactrians. These are the most warlike of the Indians and are the ones sent to collect gold; for in this region, there is a desolate area due to the sand. In this desert and sand, there are ants of great size, smaller than dogs but larger than foxes; for there are some of them caught and kept by the Persian king. These ants, making their homes underground, bring up the sand in the same manner as the ants in Greece, and they are very similar in appearance. The sand brought up is gold-bearing. So, the Indians are sent to this sand in the desert, each one harnessing three camels, leading a male on either side with a rope, and a female in the middle. On this female, the man himself mounts, having practiced how to separate her from her young offspring as recently as possible. For their camels are not inferior to horses in speed, and they are much better at carrying heavy loads.
As for the appearance of the camel, which is somewhat familiar to the Greeks, I will not write it down for those who know it. But what is not known about it, I will explain: the camel has four thigh bones and four knee joints in its hind legs, and its genitals are turned towards the tail, between the hind legs.
The Indians, indeed, using such a method and such a harness, drive towards the gold with calculation, so that they will be in the midst of the hottest heat during the seizure; for under the heat, the ants become invisible under the earth. The sun is hottest for these people in the morning, not at midday like in other places, but rising until the market closes. During this time, it burns much more than Hellas at noon, so much so that there is a saying that they sprinkle themselves with water at that time. And in the middle of the day, it almost burns similarly to the other people and the Indians. But when the midday declines, the sun becomes like the morning sun for the other people, and from this point on, it cools down more and more, until it becomes very cold at sunset.
But when the Indians come to the place, having sacks, having filled these with the sand, they drive back as quickly as possible; for the ants, immediately by the scent, as indeed it is said by the Persians, having learned, pursue. And there is a speed like no other, so that, if the Indians do not get a head start on the way while the ants are being gathered, none of them would be saved. Now the male camels, for they are slower to run than the females, are released one by one as they are being drawn, not both together; but the females, being reminded of the children they left behind, give in to no softness. Indeed, the Indians acquire most of the gold in this way, as the Persians say; but there is another, rarer one being mined in the country.
The most remote regions of the inhabited world have somehow obtained the finest things, just as Greece has obtained the seasons, which are much more beautiful than elsewhere. For India is at the farthest eastern edge of the inhabited world, as I mentioned a little earlier: in this land, the living creatures, both quadrupeds and birds, are much larger than in the other regions, except for the horses (these are smaller than the Median horses called Nesaean). Moreover, there is an abundance of gold in that place, some of which is mined, some carried by rivers, and some, as I have indicated, seized. The wild trees there bear fruit that is superior in beauty and quality to the wool from sheep; and the Indians use this wool from the trees for clothing.
But again, towards the south, Arabia is the farthest inhabited region, and in this place, frankincense is produced alone among all the lands, as well as myrrh, casia, cinnamon, and gum-mastich. All these, except for myrrh, are difficult for the Arabians to acquire. Indeed, they gather frankincense by burning storax, which the Phoenicians export to the Greeks. By burning this, they obtain it: for these frankincense-bearing trees are guarded by winged snakes, small in size, varied in appearance, many in number around each tree, these very ones that attack Egypt, but they are driven away from the trees by no other means than the smoke of the storax.
The Arabians also say this, that all the land would be filled with these snakes, if there were not something happening to them like what I knew to happen to vipers. And indeed, the divine providence, being wise as it is, has made all creatures that are cowardly and edible very prolific, so that they may not be consumed to extinction, while those that are harmful and fierce are less prolific. This is the case, because the hare is hunted by every animal and bird and human, so it is very prolific: it is the only one of all animals that conceives while already pregnant, and some of the offspring are hairy in the belly, some are bare, some are just being formed in the wombs, and some are being destroyed. This is how it is: but the lioness, being the strongest and boldest of all, gives birth once in her life to one offspring: for when she gives birth, she casts out her womb with the offspring. The cause of this is as follows: when the cub is in the womb and begins to move, it has the sharpest claws of all animals and tears the womb, and as it grows, it scratches much more, tearing it apart: the birth is near, and nothing at all of the womb is left intact.
Thus, both the vipers and the winged serpents in Arabia, if they were to come into being as their nature is, would not be livable for humans. But now, when they mate in pairs and the male is in the act of procreation, the female attaches herself to his neck, and having breathed in, she does not let go until she devours him. The male indeed dies in the manner mentioned, but the female pays such a penalty to the male: avenging the seed, the children, while still in the belly, eat through their mother, and having devoured her womb, they thus make their way out. The other snakes, being harmless to humans, both give birth to eggs and produce a great number of offspring. Now, the vipers are found throughout all the earth, but the winged serpents are gathered together in Arabia and nowhere else; for this reason, they seem to be numerous.
This frankincense, then, the Arabians obtain in such a manner, and the casia thus: when they have bound their whole body and face with ox-hides and other skins, except for their eyes, they come to the casia: which grows in a not deep lake, and around it and in it, winged creatures dwell, most similar to bats, and they make a terrible noise, and are strong in defense: these must be warded off from the eyes, so they may pluck the casia.
The gathering of cinnamon, indeed, is even more marvelous than these. For where it comes from and what land produces it, they cannot say, except that, using a likely story, some say it grows in those regions where Dionysus was raised; and they say that large birds carry these dry sticks that we, having learned from the Phoenicians, call cinnamon, and the birds carry them to their nests, which are made of clay and attached to sheer cliffs, where there is no access for a human. So then, the Arabians devise this plan: they cut the limbs of oxen and donkeys and other beasts of burden as large as possible, and carry them to these places, and after placing them near the nests, they withdraw far from them; and the birds, swooping down, carry the limbs of the beasts of burden to their nests, and the nests, not being able to hold them, break off and fall to the ground, and the men who come after gather them. Thus, the cinnamon, being gathered from these, comes to the other lands.
Indeed, the ledanon, which the Arabians call ladanon, has an even more wondrous origin: for it is the most fragrant substance that comes from a most unpleasant source - it is found in the beards of male goats, forming like a gum from the trees. This substance is useful for many perfumes, and the Arabians especially use it for burning incense.
Let so much be said about the offerings; and from the land of Arabia comes a divine fragrance. There are two kinds of sheep for them, worthy of wonder, which are found nowhere else. One of them has long tails, not less than three cubits, which if someone were to let them drag, they would have sores from rubbing against the ground; but now every one of the shepherds knows how to do carpentry to this extent: for making carts, they fasten them under the tails, attaching each tail of each animal to each cart. The other kind of sheep has wide tails, carrying them to the width of a cubit.
As the southern region inclines towards the setting sun, the land of Ethiopia, the furthest inhabited, lies. This land bears much gold and large elephants, and all kinds of wild trees, as well as ebony, and men of the greatest stature, the most beautiful, and the longest-lived.
These, indeed, now are the farthest regions in Asia and in Africa. But concerning the farthest regions in Europe towards the west, I am not able to speak with certainty; for neither do I accept that there is a river called Eridanus by foreigners, which flows into the sea towards the north wind, from which the amber is said to come, nor do I know of the existence of the Tin Islands, from which the tin comes to us. For this Eridanus itself accuses the name as being Greek and not foreign, made by some poet; but I am not able to hear of anyone having seen it, while investigating whether there is a sea beyond Europe. From the farthest regions, then, the tin and the amber come to us.
Towards the north of Europe, indeed, much gold appears to be: how it is produced, I am not able to say with certainty, but it is said to be snatched by one-eyed men called Arimaspians from the griffins. I am not persuaded by this either, as to how one-eyed men are born, having the rest of their nature similar to other humans. The farthest regions, then, which encircle the rest of the land and are within the boundary, seem to us to have the most beautiful and rarest things.
There is a plain in Asia surrounded by mountains on all sides, and there are five passes through the mountains. This plain was once of the Chorasmians, being in the borders of the Chorasmians themselves and the Hyrcanians and Parthians and Sarangians and Thamanaeans, but since the Persians have the power, it is the king's. Now then, from this surrounding mountain flows a great river, and its name is Aces. This river formerly watered, being divided into five parts, the lands of these mentioned, being led through each pass to each of them; but since it is under the Persian, they have suffered this: the king has set gates at each pass of the mountains, and having shut off the water from the outlet, the plain within the mountains becomes a sea, the river flowing in and having no way out. These, then, who formerly were accustomed to use the water, not having it to use, are in great distress. For in the winter, indeed, the god rains for them, as for other humans, but in the summer, they sow millet and sesame and use the water. So when none of the water is given to them, they themselves and their wives, standing at the doors of the king, cry out and wail, and the king orders the gates to be opened for those in the greatest need. And when the land of them has become soaked by drinking the water, these gates are shut off, and he orders others to be opened for others of those in the greatest need of the rest. As I know, having heard, he opens for a great sum of money besides the tribute.
Thus, it is so. Of the seven men who rose up against the Magus, one of them, Intaphrenes, was seized by his own arrogance and met his death shortly after the uprising. He desired to enter the royal palace and speak with the king; for indeed, the law was such that those who had rebelled against the Magus were allowed to enter the king's presence without a messenger, unless the king happened to be engaged with a woman. Intaphrenes, being one of the seven, wished to enter without announcement. However, the gatekeeper and the messenger did not allow him, saying that the king was with a woman. Intaphrenes, thinking they were lying, did the following: drawing his dagger, he cut off their ears and noses, and having lifted them up, he tied them around the bridle of his horse and fastened them around the men's necks, and sent them away.
The injured men showed themselves to the king and explained the reason for which they had suffered. Darius, fearing that the other six had done these things in common, sent for each one and tested their opinions, whether they approved of what had been done. When he learned that they were not involved in these actions, he took Intaphrenes himself, his sons, and all his household, having great hopes that his relatives were plotting a rebellion against him, and having seized them, he bound them for execution. The wife of Intaphrenes, going to the doors of the king, would weep and lament. Doing this always, she persuaded Darius to pity her. Sending a messenger, he said these things: "Woman, King Darius grants you to save one of the imprisoned family members, whomever you wish, from all." She, having deliberated, answered these things: "If indeed the king grants me the life of one, I choose my brother from all." Darius, having learned these things and marveling at the speech, sent and asked, "Woman, the king asks you, with what thought, leaving behind your husband and children, did you choose your brother to survive, who is also more alien to you than your children and less dear than your husband?" She answered these things: "O king, another husband could become mine if a god willed, and other children if I lost these; but with my father and mother no longer living, another brother could in no way become mine. With this thought, I said these things." Indeed, the woman seemed to Darius to have spoken well, and he released both the one she asked for and the eldest of the children, being pleased with her; but he killed all the others. Thus, one of the seven immediately perished in the manner mentioned.
During the illness of Cambyses, these events occurred. Oroetes, a Persian man, had been appointed as the governor of Sardis by Cyrus. This man desired an unholy deed: for neither having suffered anything nor having heard a vain word from Polycrates of Samos, nor even having seen him before, he desired to take and destroy him, as most people say, for some such reason. Oroetes and another Persian, whose name was Mitrobates, the governor of the province in Dascyleium, were sitting at the doors of the king when they fell into a quarrel, and as they were judging about excellence, Mitrobates said to Oroetes, who was boasting, "For you are in the account of men, who did not acquire for the king the island of Samos, lying near your province, so easy to be taken, as it is, when one of the locals with fifteen soldiers revolted and now rules it." They say that, having heard this and having been grieved by the reproach, he desired not so much to punish the one who said these things as to utterly destroy Polycrates, on account of whom he had heard evil.
But the lesser ones say that Oroetes sent a herald to Samos, indeed in need of money (for this is not said), and Polycrates happened to be lying down in the men's quarters, and Anacreon of Teos was also present with him. And somehow, either because he was deliberately ignoring the matters of Oroetes, or some such coincidence occurred: for the herald of Oroetes, having come forth, spoke, and Polycrates (for he happened to be turned away towards the wall) neither turned around nor answered.
These, then, are the two conflicting accounts given for the death of Polycrates, and one may believe whichever of them one wishes. Now, Oroetes, who was dwelling in Magnesia above the river Maeander, sent Myrsus, son of Gyges, a Lydian man, to Samos, bearing a message, having learned the intention of Polycrates. For Polycrates was the first of the Greeks whom we know to have aimed at ruling the sea, apart from Minos of Cnossus and any other before him who ruled the sea: and of the human race that is spoken of, Polycrates was the first, having many hopes of ruling Ionia and the islands. So, having learned that he was planning this, Oroetes sent a message saying the following: "Oroetes says this to Polycrates: I understand that you are plotting great deeds, and you do not have money according to your intentions. Now, by doing this, you will set yourself right and also save me: for King Cambyses is plotting death against me, and this is clearly reported to me. Now, by getting me and my money out, keep some of it yourself and let me keep the rest: for the sake of money, you will rule all of Hellas. And if you do not believe me about the money, send whoever is most trustworthy to you, and I will show it to him."
Upon hearing these things, Polycrates was pleased and desired to help. For he greatly longed for money, he first sent Maeandrius, son of Maeandrius, a man of the citizens, who was his scribe, to inspect the situation. This man, not much time after these events, dedicated all the luxurious furnishings from the men's quarters of Polycrates to the Heraeum. And Oroetes, having learned that an inspector was coming, did the following: he filled eight chests with stones, except for a very small space around their edges, and he placed gold on top of the stones. Having locked the chests, he kept them ready. And Maeandrius, having come and seen, reported back to Polycrates.
And he, with many of the diviners forbidding and many of the friends advising him, prepared himself, and also with his daughter having seen such a dream: it seemed to her that her father, being high in the air, was washed by Zeus and anointed by the Sun. Having seen this vision, she tried every way not to have Polycrates go abroad to Oroetes, and indeed, as he was going to the fifty-oared ship, she prophesied. But he threatened her, that if he should return safely, she would remain unmarried for a long time. And she prayed that these things would be fulfilled: for she wished to remain unmarried for a longer time rather than to be deprived of her father.
Polycrates, disregarding all advice, sailed to Oroetes, accompanied by many of his companions, among whom was Democedes, son of Calliphon, a man from Croton, who was a physician and practiced his art most excellently among his contemporaries. But when Polycrates arrived in Magnesia, he was miserably destroyed, neither in a manner worthy of himself nor of his own intentions: for indeed, none of the tyrants of Syracuse nor any other Greek tyrant is worthy to be compared with Polycrates in magnificence. And having killed him in an unworthy manner, Oroetes crucified him: and of those who followed him, as many as were Samians, he sent away, commanding them to know that they were free thanks to him, and as many as were foreigners and slaves of the followers, he held in the account of slaves. Polycrates, being suspended, completed the whole vision of his daughter: for indeed, he was washed by Zeus when it rained, and anointed by the Sun, as he himself released moisture from his body.
Indeed, the many successes of Polycrates came to an end, as Amasis, the king of Egypt, had foretold. And not much time passed before the avengers of Polycrates came upon Oroetes. For after the death of Cambyses and the rule of the Magi, Oroetes, remaining in Sardis, did not help the Persians, who had been deprived of their power by the Medes. But in this turmoil, on the one hand, he killed Mitrobates, the governor from Dascyleium, who had reproached him for his dealings with Polycrates, and on the other hand, he killed the son of Mitrobates, Cranaspes, both men being esteemed among the Persians. He also committed various other acts of violence, and when a messenger from Darius came to him, since the message brought to him was not to his liking, he had the messenger killed on his way back, sending men to ambush him on the road, and having killed him, he made him disappear along with his horse.
When Darius indeed took power, he desired to punish Oroetes for all his wrongdoings, and most of all for Mitrobates and his son. However, he did not think it wise to send an army openly against him, as the affairs were still in turmoil, and he was new to power, and he learned that Oroetes had great strength: a thousand Persians were his bodyguards, and he had control over the Phrygian, Lydian, and Ionian provinces. So, Darius devised this plan. Calling together the most esteemed Persians, he said these words to them: "O Persians, who among you, taking this upon himself, would accomplish this for me with cunning, and not with force and multitude? For where cunning is needed, force has no place. So, which of you will bring Oroetes to me, either alive or dead? He has indeed done no good to the Persians, but has done great harm: he has killed two of our own, Mitrobates and his son, and he kills those who summon him and are sent by me, showing unbearable arrogance. Therefore, before he accomplishes any greater harm to the Persians, he must be made to pay with death."
Darius indeed asked for help, and thirty men volunteered, each wanting to do the task themselves. Darius told them not to argue but to draw lots. The lot fell to Bagaeus, son of Artontes. Bagaeus then wrote many letters about various topics and sealed them with Darius' seal. He took the letters to Sardis and presented them to Oroetes. As Bagaeus arrived and met with Oroetes, he handed each letter one by one to a royal scribe to read, as all the king's governors had scribes. Bagaeus gave the letters to test the loyalty of the spearmen, to see if they would turn against Oroetes. He noticed that they were greatly influenced by the letters and their content. Then, he gave another letter which said, "Persians! King Darius forbids you to be Oroetes' guard." Upon hearing this, the spearmen lowered their weapons. Encouraged by their obedience, Bagaeus gave the scribe the final letter, which read, "King Darius instructs the Persians in Sardis to kill Oroetes." Hearing this, the spearmen immediately drew their swords and killed Oroetes. In this way, justice was served for Polycrates the Samian, as Oroetes the Persian met his end.
When the possessions of Oroetes were brought and carried to Susa, it happened not long after that King Darius, while hunting, dismounted from his horse and twisted his foot. And indeed, it was twisted quite strongly: for his ankle came out of its joint. And although he had previously thought that he had the best Egyptian doctors around him, he used them. But they, by wrenching and forcing the foot, were doing greater harm. For seven days and seven nights, Darius was kept awake by the pain of the injury. On the eighth day, when he was faring poorly, someone who had previously heard in Sardis of the skill of Democedes, the Crotoniate, reported it to Darius. And he ordered to bring him to himself as quickly as possible. And when they found him among the slaves of Oroetes, neglected in whatever condition, they brought him forward, dragging chains and dressed in rags.
Standing in the middle, Darius asked him if he knew the art of medicine. Democedes did not admit it, fearing that if he revealed himself, he would be completely deprived of returning to Hellas. However, Darius realized that he knew the art and ordered those who brought him to bring whips and spikes into the middle. Then, Democedes confessed, saying that he did not know it well, but having associated with a physician, he had a slight knowledge of the art. After that, with Darius' permission, he used Greek remedies and applied gentle treatments after the harsh ones, making him sleep and, in a short time, restored him to health, when he no longer hoped to be able to use his foot. After this, Darius rewarded him with two pairs of golden shackles. Democedes asked him if he was deliberately giving him double the trouble because he had made him healthy. Darius, pleased with the response, sent him to his wives. The eunuchs who led him told the women that this man had given the king his life back. Each of them, tapping a gold bowl into a chest, rewarded Democedes with such a lavish gift that the servant who followed, named Sciton, picked up the coins that fell from the bowls, and a large sum of gold was collected for him.
And this Democedes, having come from Croton, associated with Polycrates. He was bound to his father in Croton by a harsh temper. When he could no longer bear it, he left and went to Aegina. Settling in this place, in the first year, he surpassed the other physicians, even though he was without equipment and had none of the tools that are related to the art. In the second year, the Aeginetans hired him for a talent in public service, in the third year the Athenians for a hundred minae, and in the fourth year Polycrates for two talents. Thus, he arrived in Samos, and from this man, not least, the physicians of Croton gained a good reputation. For it happened that at this time, the physicians of Croton were said to be the first in Greece, and the second were those of Cyrene. At the same time, the Argives were heard to be the first in music among the Greeks.
Then indeed Democedes, having healed Darius in Susa, had a very great house and had become a fellow-diner with the king, and everything else was present to him except for going away to the Greeks. And this, the Egyptian physicians, who treated the king before, were about to be impaled because they were saved by a Greek physician, these, having been begged off by the king, he saved; and this, an Elean soothsayer, following Polycrates and having been neglected among the slaves, he saved. And Democedes was a very great matter with the king.
In a short time after these things, the following other events happened. A tumor grew on the breast of Atossa, the daughter of Cyrus and wife of Darius, and after it burst, it spread forward. For as long as it was smaller, she hid it and was ashamed to tell anyone; but when it was in a bad state, she sent for Democedes and showed it to him. He said that he would make her healthy, and he made her swear that she would do him a favor in return for this, whatever he might ask of her; and he assured her that he would ask for nothing that would bring shame.
After Democedes had indeed healed her, Atossa, having been instructed by Democedes, spoke to Darius in their bedchamber in this manner: "O king, possessing such great power, you neither add any nation nor increase the power of the Persians. Yet it is fitting for a man who is both young and master of great wealth to show himself as a ruler, so that the Persians may learn that they are governed by a man. And it is for your benefit to do both these things: so that the Persians may know that they are ruled by a man, and so that they may be worn out by war and not have leisure to plot against you. For now, you could undertake some work while you are still young in age: for as the body grows, so do the thoughts, and as it ages, they age with it and become dull in all matters." She spoke these things from instruction, and he answered thus: "O woman, you have spoken all that I myself have been considering to do: for I have resolved to build a bridge from this continent to the other continent and to march against the Scythians; and this will be accomplished in a short time." Atossa said the following: "Now, let the first expedition against the Scythians be left alone: for when you wish, they will be yours. But do lead an expedition against Hellas for me. For I desire, having heard by report, to have Laconian, Argive, Attic, and Corinthian women as my servants. And you have the most suitable man of all men to receive each part of Hellas and to guide you, the one who drew out your foot." Darius answered, "O woman, since it seems good to you that we should first make trial of Hellas, it seems better to me to send Persian spies first, along with this man whom you speak of, to them, who, having learned and seen, will report each thing to us; and then, having become well informed, I will turn against them."
He said these things and at the same time both word and deed he did. For as soon as the day shone forth, calling fifteen esteemed Persian men, he instructed them to follow Democedes and to go through the coastal regions of Hellas, so that Democedes would not escape them, but they would certainly bring him back. Having given these instructions to them, secondly, calling Democedes himself, he asked him that, having explained and received all of Hellas, he would come back to the Persians: and he ordered him to take all his belongings as gifts for his father and brothers, saying that he would give him many times more in return: and in addition to the gifts, he said he would add a ship filled with all sorts of good things, which would sail with him. Darius, it seems to me, promised him these things without any deceitful thought. But Democedes, fearing that Darius might be testing him, did not eagerly accept all that was offered, but said that he would leave his own possessions in his country, so that when he returned he would have them, however, the ship, which Darius promised as a gift for his brothers, he said he would accept. Having given the same instructions to him, Darius sent them to the sea.
And these men, having gone down to Phoenicia and from Phoenicia to the city of Sidon, immediately filled two triremes, and at the same time a large ship with all sorts of goods. Having prepared everything, they sailed to Hellas, and approaching its coastal regions, they observed and recorded them, until having seen much and famous parts of it, they arrived in Tarentum of Italy. There, Aristophilides, the king of the Tarentines, out of sympathy for Democedes, removed the steering gear of the Median ships, and he detained the Persians themselves as if they were spies. While these men were suffering these things, Democedes arrived in Croton. And when he had already arrived in his own land, Aristophilides released the Persians and gave back to them the equipment of the ships which he had taken.
Sailing from there, the Persians and pursuing Democedes arrived in Croton, and finding him in the marketplace, they seized him. Some of the Crotonians, fearing the Persian matters, were ready to let him go, while others resisted and struck the Persians with sticks, who were uttering these words: "Men of Croton, see what you are doing: you are taking away a man who has become a runaway slave of the king. How will this defiance be useful to King Darius? How will it be good for you if you drive us away? Which city will we attack first? Which will we try to enslave first?" Saying these things, they did not persuade the Crotonians, but having taken away Democedes and the ship they had brought, they sailed back to Asia, no longer seeking to learn about the rest of Hellas, having been deprived of their guide. However, Democedes gave them this command as they were sailing away, urging them to tell Darius that Democedes was betrothed to the daughter of Milon. For indeed, the name of the wrestler Milon was very famous among the king; and according to this, it seems to me that Democedes hastened to complete this marriage, having spent a large sum of money, so that he might appear to be in Darius' favor and esteemed in his own country.
Sailing away from Croton, the Persians' ships fell upon the coast of Iapygia, and there they were enslaved. Gillus, a man of Tarentum and an exile, rescued them and led them to King Darius. In return for this, Darius was ready to give him whatever he himself desired. Gillus chose to have a return to Tarentum, having previously shared his misfortune. In order that he might not disturb Greece, if a great expedition should sail to Italy on his account, he said that only the Cnidians should be used for the return, thinking that with these being the closest friends to the Tarentines, the return would be most agreeable to him. Darius, having accepted this, carried it out: for sending a messenger to Cnidus, he ordered them to bring Gillus to Tarentum. The Cnidians, obeying Darius, could not persuade the Tarentines, and they were unable to use force. Now these things were thus accomplished: these Persians were the first to come from Asia to Hellas, and they became spies for such a reason.
After this, King Darius seized Samos, the first of all cities, both Greek and barbarian, for such a reason. When Cambyses, son of Cyrus, campaigned against Egypt, many Greeks arrived in Egypt, some, as was natural, campaigning for trade, and some others as spectators of the land. Among them was Syloson, son of Aiakes, brother of Polycrates and an exile from Samos. This Syloson was seized by a certain fortune. Wearing a red cloak, he was shopping in Memphis. Darius, being a bodyguard of Cambyses and of no great account, saw him and desired the cloak, and approaching him, he tried to buy it. Syloson, seeing Darius greatly desiring the cloak, relying on divine fortune, said, "I will sell this for no amount of money, but I will give it otherwise, if indeed it must happen this way for you." Darius, admiring this, received the garment.
Syloson indeed believed that he had lost this due to his simplicity. But as time went on, Cambyses died and the seven rose up against the Magus, and of the seven, Darius held the kingship. Syloson learned that the kingship had come to this man, to whom he himself had given the cloak in Egypt when he asked for it. Going up to Susa, he sat in the vestibule of the king's dwelling and said that he was a benefactor of Darius. Hearing this, the doorkeeper reported it to the king. Darius, wondering, said to him, "Who is this Greek benefactor whom I am indebted to, having recently come to power? No one has come up to us from them, and I have no debt to speak of any Greek man. Nevertheless, bring him in, so that I may know why he says this." The doorkeeper brought Syloson in, and standing in the middle, the interpreters asked him who he was and what he had done, saying that he was the king's benefactor. So Syloson told everything that had happened concerning the cloak, and how he himself was the one who gave it. In response to this, Darius said, "O most noble of men, you are the one who gave me something, even if it was small, when I had no power at all. But the favor is equal, just as if I were to receive something great now. In return for this, I give you boundless gold and silver, so that you may never regret having done good to Darius, son of Hystaspes." Syloson said in response to this, "Do not give me gold or silver, O king, but save and give me my homeland Samos, which now, since my brother Polycrates has died at the hands of Oroetes, is held by our slave. Give it to me without bloodshed and enslavement."
Upon hearing these things, Darius sent both an army and a general, Otanes, who was one of the seven men, having instructed him to carry out whatever Syloson needed. And having gone down to the sea, Otanes prepared the army.
At that time, Maeandrius, son of Maeandrius, held power in Samos, having received the authority from Polycrates. He wanted to become the most just man, but it did not happen. For when the death of Polycrates was announced to him, he did the following: first, he established an altar to Zeus the Liberator and marked out a sacred precinct around it, which now exists in the suburb; and then, having done this, he gathered an assembly of all the citizens and spoke these words: "As you know, and you yourselves, the scepter and all the power of Polycrates has been entrusted to me, and it is now in my power to rule over you. But I will not do what I blame in others, for neither did Polycrates please me, ruling over men like himself, nor does anyone else who does such things. Polycrates indeed has now fulfilled his own destiny, but I, placing the authority in the middle, proclaim equality for you. However, I claim these just privileges for myself: that from the wealth of Polycrates, six talents be reserved for me, and in addition to these, I will choose the priesthood for myself and for those who are always born from me, of Zeus the Liberator, to whom I myself have founded a temple and around whom I place freedom for you." He indeed promised these things to the Samians; but one of them, rising up, said, "But you are not even worthy to rule over us, being born badly and being a destruction. Rather, you should give an account of the money you have managed."
Telesarchus, being esteemed among the citizens, said these things. But Maeandrius, having conceived in his mind that if he were to give up the rule, someone else would become a tyrant in his place, no longer had any intention of giving it up. Instead, when he withdrew to the acropolis, summoning each one as if he would give an account of the money, he seized and bound them. Indeed, those were bound, and after these things, Maeandrius was seized by illness. His brother, whose name was Lycaretus, hoping that he would die, so that he might more easily take hold of the affairs in Samos, killed all the prisoners. For they certainly did not wish, as it seemed, to be free.
So when the Persians arrived at Samos, bringing Syloson with them, no one raised their hands against them; instead, the supporters of Maeandrius, as well as Maeandrius himself, said they were ready to be under a truce and to leave the island. And when Otanes agreed to these terms and made a treaty, the most distinguished of the Persians, having set up their thrones, sat down opposite the acropolis.
Maeandrius, the tyrant, had a somewhat unstable brother, whose name was Charilaus; this man, having committed some offense, was bound in chains, and at that time, hearing the events taking place and peering through the chains, when he saw the Persians sitting peacefully, he shouted and said, wanting to speak with Maeandrius. And when Maeandrius heard, he ordered him to be untied and brought to himself; but when he was brought quickly, reproaching and reviling him, he persuaded him to attack the Persians, saying such things: "You, the worst of men, having bound me, your own brother, who did nothing worthy of chains, deemed me worthy of chains; but seeing the Persians expelling you and making your land uninhabited, you do not dare to take revenge, being so easily able to be captured. But if you have become cowardly towards them, give me the foreign guards, and I will take revenge on them for their unworthy arrival here; and I am ready to send you away from the island."
Charilaus spoke these things, and Maeandrius took up the speech, as I think, not arriving at this point out of foolishness, as to believe that his own power would prevail over the king's, but rather out of envy towards Syloson, if he was about to receive the city unharmed without any trouble. Therefore, he wished to provoke the Persians so as to make the Samian affairs as weak as possible and thus hand them over, well understanding that the Persians, having suffered badly, were going to become bitterly hostile towards the Samians, and knowing for himself that there was a secure way out of the island whenever he himself wished: for he had made a secret passage from the acropolis leading to the sea. Maeandrius himself then sailed out of Samos; Charilaus, having armed all the foreign guards and having raised the gates, sent them against the Persians, who neither expected nor thought that such a thing had happened at all. And the foreign guards, having fallen upon the Persians, killed those who were carried in litters and were of the greatest account. And while they were doing these things, the rest of the Persian army came to their aid; but the foreign guards, being pressed, were driven back into the acropolis.
The general Otanes, seeing the great suffering that had befallen the Persians, remembered the orders that Darius had given him when he sent him out, which were not to kill any of the Samians nor to enslave them, but to hand over the island to Syloson without any harm. However, he forgot these orders and instead commanded his army to kill everyone they captured, both men and boys alike. At this point, some of the army besieged the acropolis, while others killed everyone they came across, both inside the temples and outside of them.
Maeandrius, having escaped from Samos, sailed to Lacedaemon. Arriving there and having brought up the possessions he had, he did the following: as silver and gold drinking cups were set out, his servants cleaned them, and he, at that time, in conversation with Cleomenes, the son of Anaxandrides, ruling Sparta, led him to the house. And when Cleomenes saw the drinking cups, he marveled and was amazed. And Maeandrius would order him to take away as many of them as he wanted. This, both twice and thrice said by Maeandrius, Cleomenes becomes the most just of men, who, although offered, did not think it right to take, but having learned that he would be found giving to others of the citizens, he went to the ephors and said it would be better for Sparta to send away the Samian stranger from the Peloponnese, so that he might not persuade either himself or any other of the Spartans to become evil. And they, having obeyed, proclaimed Maeandrius to be banished.
And the Persians, having cleared Samos of its men, handed it over to Syloson, being empty. However, at a later time, the general Otanes also settled people in it, both because of a dream he had in the evening and a disease that seized him, causing his genitals to be ill.
And when the naval force was away at Samos, the Babylonians revolted, being very well prepared: for during the time when the Magus ruled and the seven rose up, they were preparing for the siege in all this time and turmoil. And somehow, while doing these things, they were unnoticed. And when they openly revolted, they did the following: having sent away the mothers, each man chose one woman from his own household whom he wanted to make bread, and having gathered all the remaining women together, they strangled them: and each man chose one woman to make bread, and they strangled the others so that they would not consume their bread.
Upon learning these things, Darius gathered all his power and marched against them; and having advanced upon Babylon, he besieged them, who cared nothing for the siege. For the Babylonians, going up to the battlements of the wall, danced and jeered at Darius and his army, and one of them said this word: "Why do you sit here, O Persians, and not go away? For you will take us when mules give birth." One of the Babylonians said this, never expecting a mule to give birth.
And after seven months and a year having passed, Darius indeed was vexed, and the entire army, not being able to capture the Babylonians. And yet, Darius had employed every cunning device and all contrivances against them; but not even thus was he able to capture them, having tried other cunning devices, and indeed also the one by which Cyrus had captured them, and he had attempted this. But the Babylonians were terribly on their guard, and it was not possible for him to capture them.
In that place, during the twentieth month, to Zopyrus, the son of Megabyzus, this one who became one of the seven men who overthrew the Magus, to this son of Megabyzus, Zopyrus, this marvel occurred: one of the mules carrying food gave birth. And when it was announced to him, and due to disbelief, Zopyrus himself saw the infant, having told those who saw it to tell no one about the event, he deliberated. And to him, in relation to the words of the Babylonian, who at the beginning said, when mules give birth, then the wall will be captured, in relation to this statement, it seemed to Zopyrus that Babylon was able to be captured: for with the god, both for that one to say it and for himself to have the mule give birth.
And when he thought it was now fated for Babylon to be captured, he approached Darius and inquired if he greatly cared about taking Babylon. And learning that it was highly valued, he planned something else, how he himself would be the one to capture it and it would be his own deed: for among the Persians, great deeds of valor are highly honored for the future. Now he did not reveal to anyone that he was able to make it possible to subdue it by his own action, but if he mutilated himself and then defected to them. At this point, making light of it, he mutilated himself with an incurable mutilation: for cutting off his own nose and ears, and badly trimming his hair, and whipping himself, he went to Darius.
Darius, indeed, was greatly distressed when he saw the most esteemed man mutilated, and leaping up from his throne, he cried out and asked him who was the one who mutilated him and why he did it. And he said, "This is not a man, unless it is you, who has such power to treat me like this: no one else, O king, will do these things, but I myself have done this to myself, intending to do something terrible to make the Assyrians laugh at the Persians." And he replied, "O most wretched of men, you have put the most beautiful name on the most shameful deed, saying that you have irreparably treated yourself for the sake of those being besieged. But why, O foolish one, will the enemies surrender sooner because of your mutilation? How did you not destroy your senses by destroying yourself?" And he said, "If I had told you what I was going to do, you would not have seen me: but now, having taken the risk upon myself, I have done it. Now then, if you do not need your own forces, we will capture Babylon. For I will indeed defect to the wall as I am and say to them that I suffered these things because of you: and I think, having persuaded them that these things are so, I will obtain an army. And you, from whatever day I enter the wall, from that day to the tenth day of your own army, of which no part will be destroyed, station a thousand at the gates called the gates of Semiramis: then again from the tenth to the seventh, station two thousand for me at the gates called the gates of the Ninevites: and from the seventh, let there be a break of twenty days, and then bring others and station four thousand at the gates called the gates of the Chaldeans. Let neither the former ones nor these have anything of the defenders, except daggers: but let them have this. And after the twentieth day, immediately order the rest of the army to attack around the wall, and station the Persians for me at the gates called the gates of Belus and the Cissian gates. For as I think, having received great deeds from me, the Babylonians will entrust me with the other things and indeed with the keys of the gates: and from there it will be a concern for me and the Persians to do what must be done."
Having given these instructions, he went to the gates, turning back as if he were truly a deserter. The ones stationed on the towers, seeing this, ran down and, opening the other gate slightly, asked who he was and why he had come. And he told them that he was Zopyrus and that he was defecting to their side. Hearing this, the gatekeepers led him to the common assembly of the Babylonians. Standing there, he lamented, saying that he had suffered these things at the hands of Darius because he had advised him to withdraw the army, since no way of capturing the city appeared. "Now," he said, "I have come to you, Babylonians, as a great benefit, but as a great harm to Darius, his army, and the Persians. For he will not mock me, having mutilated me in this way. I know all the ways of his plans." He spoke such things.
The Babylonians, seeing a man most esteemed among the Persians, deprived of his nose and ears, and covered with blood from the whip, were fully convinced that he spoke the truth and had come to be their ally. They were ready to grant him whatever he asked of them, and he requested an army. When he received this, he did what he had agreed upon with Darius: for on the tenth day, he led the Babylonian army and surrounded the thousand soldiers, whom Darius had first ordered to be stationed, and killed them. The Babylonians, seeing that his actions matched his words, were extremely delighted and were ready to serve him in every way. Then, after the agreed number of days had passed, he again chose a group of Babylonians, led them out, and killed the two thousand soldiers of Darius' army. The Babylonians, seeing this deed as well, praised Zopyrus greatly. Then, after the agreed number of days had passed again, he led them to the aforementioned place, and having surrounded them, killed the four thousand soldiers. When this was accomplished, Zopyrus was everything to the Babylonians, and he was accepted by them as both their general and the guardian of their walls.
But when Darius made an assault upon the wall according to the plan, then indeed Zopyrus revealed the whole deceit. For the Babylonians, having gone up onto the wall, were defending themselves against the army of Darius attacking, but Zopyrus, having opened the gates called Cissian and Belian, let the Persians into the wall. Of the Babylonians, those who saw what was done, indeed fled to the sanctuary of Zeus called Belus; those who did not see, remained in their own positions, each one, until they too learned that they had been betrayed.
Babylon indeed now thus the second time was captured. And Darius, after he had conquered the Babylonians, this indeed of them the wall he took down and the gates all he removed: for the first time having captured Cyrus the Babylon he did of these neither: this indeed Darius of the men the most prominent to three thousand he impaled, and to the rest of the Babylonians he gave back the city to inhabit. And as they will have women the Babylonians in order that for them a generation may be born, these things Darius foreseeing did: for their own, as also at the beginning has been declared, they had strangled the Babylonians foreseeing the shortage of grain: he ordered the neighboring nations women into Babylon to establish, as many indeed as to each one he ordered, so that the total of the women came to fifty thousand: and from these women the now Babylonians have come to be.
But no one of the good deeds of the Persians surpassed Zopyrus by the judgment of Darius, neither of those who came later nor of those who came before, except only Cyrus: for no one of the Persians deemed himself worthy to be compared with him. And Darius is said to have often expressed this opinion, that he would rather have Zopyrus be uninjured than for twenty Babylons to be added to the one he already had. And he honored him greatly: for he gave him gifts every year, those which are most valuable among the Persians, and he granted him to govern Babylon without paying tribute until the end of his life, and he bestowed many other things upon him. And this Zopyrus became the father of Megabyzus, who led an army in Egypt against the Athenians and their allies: and this Megabyzus became the father of another Zopyrus, who defected to Athens from the Persians.