Aristagoras, indeed now, having caused the Ionian revolt, thus ends. Histiaeus, however, the tyrant of Miletus, having been honored by Darius, was present in Sardis. And when he had arrived from Susa, Artaphrenes, the governor of Sardis, asked him for what reason he thought the Ionians had rebelled. He, however, said he did not know and was amazed at what had happened, as if he knew nothing at all about the present affairs. But Artaphrenes, seeing him scheming, said, knowing the truth of the revolt, "Thus, Histiaeus, it stands regarding these matters: this shoe you indeed stitched, but Aristagoras put it on."
Artaphrenes indeed spoke these things concerning the revolt. Histiaeus, however, fearing that Artaphrenes understood, under the first approaching night, fled to the sea, having deceived King Darius. He, having undertaken to conquer the largest island, Sardo, was attempting to assume the leadership of the Ionians in the war against Darius. And having crossed over to Chios, he was bound by the Chians, having been recognized by them as doing newer things against them on behalf of Darius. However, the Chians, having learned the whole story, that he was an enemy to the king, released him.
At this point, indeed, being questioned by the Ionians, Histiaeus, as to why he so eagerly sent the order to Aristagoras to revolt from the king and caused so much harm to the Ionians, he did not reveal the true reason to them very clearly. Instead, he told them that King Darius had planned to move the Phoenicians to Ionia and the Ionians to Phoenicia, and it was for this reason that he sent the order. In fact, the king had not planned any of this at all, but Histiaeus wanted to frighten the Ionians.
Afterwards, Histiaeus, through a messenger named Hermippus, a man of Atarnite, sent letters to the Persians in Sardis, as they had previously discussed rebelling. But Hermippus, instead of delivering them to the intended recipients, handed the letters to Artaphrenes. And Artaphrenes, having learned everything that was happening, ordered Hermippus to deliver the letters from Histiaeus to those whom he was carrying them for, and to give him the responses from the Persians that were being sent back to Histiaeus. And when these things became known, Artaphrenes executed many Persians there.
Concerning Sardis, indeed, there was turmoil. Histiaeus, having been cut off from this hope, the Chians led him to Miletus, Histiaeus himself having asked. But the Milesians, being glad to have been rid of Aristagoras, were by no means eager to receive another tyrant into their land, having tasted freedom. And indeed, for it was night, Histiaeus, attempting to go down into Miletus by force, was wounded in the thigh by the Milesians. He, indeed, as he was repelled from his own city, arrived back in Chios. From there, for he did not persuade the Chians to give him ships, he crossed over to Mytilene and persuaded the Lesbians to give him ships. They, having filled eight triremes, sailed together with Histiaeus to Byzantium, and sitting there, they took the ships sailing out of the Euxine Sea, except for as many of them as said they were ready to obey Histiaeus.
Now Histiaeus and the Mytilenaeans were doing these things. But upon Miletus itself, a large naval and land force was expected: for the Persian generals having gathered together and having made one camp, they marched upon Miletus, having made the other strongholds of lesser concern. Of the naval forces, indeed, the Phoenicians were the most eager, and the Cyprians, having been recently subdued, also joined in the campaign, as well as the Cilicians and Egyptians.
Those indeed who were marching upon Miletus and the rest of Ionia, the Ionians, learning these things, sent representatives of themselves to Panionium. When these arrived at this place and deliberated, it seemed best not to gather any land army to oppose the Persians, but to let the Milesians defend their walls themselves, and to fill the naval force, leaving none of the ships empty, and to gather as quickly as possible at Lade, intending to fight a naval battle for Miletus. Now Lade is a small island lying near the city of the Milesians.
After these things, the Ionians were present with their ships filled, and with them also were the Aeolians who inhabit Lesbos. They were arrayed thus: the Milesians themselves held the horn toward the dawn, providing eighty ships; next to them were the Prieneans with twelve ships, and the Myesians with three ships; next to the Myesians were the Teians with seventeen ships, and next to the Teians were the Chians with one hundred ships; and next to these were the Erythraeans and the Phocaeans, the Erythraeans providing eight ships, and the Phocaeans three; next to the Phocaeans were the Lesbians with seventy ships; and lastly, holding the horn toward the evening, were the Samians with sixty ships. The total number of all these was three hundred and fifty-three triremes.
These were the Ionians, and of the foreigners the number of the ships was six hundred. And when these also arrived at the Milesian territory and all their land army was present with them, then the Persian generals, learning the number of the Ionian ships, were struck with fear lest they should not be able to overcome them, and so they would not be able to take Miletus, not being masters of the sea, and would be in danger of suffering some evil from Darius. Considering these things, they gathered together the tyrants of the Ionians, who, having been deposed from their governments by Aristagoras the Milesian, had fled for refuge to the Medes, and were then serving as soldiers in the expedition against Miletus. Having called together these men who were present, they said to them as follows: "Men of Ionia, now let one of you show himself a doer of good service to the house of the king: for let each one of you try to separate his own countrymen from the rest of the allied force. And to these make proclamation of these things, that they shall suffer no harm by reason of their revolt, neither shall their temples be burnt nor their private possessions, nor shall they have anything more done to them by force than they had before. But if they will not do this and are resolved to come to a battle, then threaten them with these things which shall come upon them, that if they are worsted in the fight, they shall be made slaves, and we shall make eunuchs of their sons, and their maidens we shall carry off to Bactra, and their land we shall deliver to others."
So they said these things. And the tyrants of the Ionians each sent messages during the night to their own people, announcing these things. But the Ionians, to whom these messages arrived, were filled with indignation and did not accept the betrayal; and each of them thought that the Persians were announcing these things only to themselves.
These things, indeed, happened immediately upon the arrival of the Persians in Miletus: and after the Ionians had gathered together in Lade, assemblies took place, and indeed, others also spoke to them, and among them, the Phocaean general Dionysius, saying these things: "For our affairs stand on the razor's edge, men of Ionia, either to be free or to be slaves, and to these as runaway slaves: now then, if you are willing to endure hardships, immediately indeed there will be toil for you, but you will be able to overcome your opponents and be free: but if you use softness and disorder, I have no hope for you not to give punishment to the king for your rebellion. But be persuaded by me and entrust yourselves to me: and I, with the gods distributing what is equal, undertake either not to engage with the enemies or, engaging, to be much diminished."
Hearing these things, the Ionians entrusted themselves to Dionysius. And he, leading the ships each time to the wing, so that he might use the rowers by making a passage through the ships one after another and arming the soldiers, for the rest of the day he kept the ships at anchor, and he gave the Ionians work throughout the day. Until now, for seven days, they obeyed and did what was ordered; but on the eighth day, the Ionians, being unaccustomed to such hardships and worn out by toil and the sun, said to themselves these things: "What gods, having transgressed, do we fill up with these things? We, who, having lost our senses and sailed out of our minds, entrusted ourselves to a boastful Phocaean man, who brought three ships: and he, having taken us, torments us with unbearable evils, and indeed many of us have fallen into sickness, and many are likely to suffer the same thing. Before these evils, it is better for us to endure whatever else there is to suffer and the slavery that will be, rather than to be held together with the present situation. Come, let us not obey him for the rest." They said these things, and after that, immediately, no one wanted to obey, but as an army, having pitched tents on the island, they sought shade and did not want to go on the ships nor to attempt it.
And so, learning these things that were happening among the Ionians, the generals of the Samians then indeed sent messages to Aeaces, the son of Syloson, urging them on behalf of the Persians, asking them to abandon the alliance of the Ionians. The Samians, therefore, seeing that there was at the same time much disorder among the Ionians, accepted the messages, and at the same time it seemed to them impossible to overcome the king's affairs, and they knew well that if they were to overcome Darius' present fleet, another five times as large would be available to them. Therefore, taking hold of the pretext, as soon as they saw that the Ionians were not willing to be useful, they were making it their business to save both their own temples and their private possessions. And Aeaces, from whom the Samians received the messages, was indeed the son of Syloson, the son of Aeaces, and being the ruler of Samos, he had been deprived of his rule by Aristagoras of Miletus, just as the other rulers of Ionia.
Then indeed, when the Phoenicians had sailed up, the Ionians themselves also set their ships against them in a battle formation. But when they came near and were mingling with one another, I do not have the ability to write accurately which of the Ionians became cowardly or brave men in this naval battle: for they blame one another. The Samians, however, are said to have raised their sails here according to the agreement with Aeaces and to have sailed away from the battle line to Samos, except for eleven ships: and the commanders of these ships remained and fought, having disobeyed their generals. And the common people of the Samians gave them for this deed to be inscribed on a pillar with their ancestors as having become brave men, and this pillar is in the marketplace. And the Lesbians, seeing their neighbors fleeing, did the same as the Samians: and so also most of the Ionians did these same things.
Of those who remained in the sea battle, the Chians were most terribly afflicted, as they demonstrated both brilliant deeds and an unwillingness to act cowardly. For they provided, as was said before, one hundred ships, and on each of them forty of the citizens serving as marines. Seeing that many of their allies were betraying them, they did not think it just to become like their own cowards, but rather, having been left with only a few allies, they sailed through and fought in the naval battle, during which they captured many of the enemy's ships and cast off the greater part of their own.
The Chians indeed with the remaining ships escaped to their own land; but as many of the Chians as had ships disabled by wounds, these, being pursued, fled for refuge to Mykale. Having beached their ships there, they left them behind and were carried on foot through the mainland. And when the Chians, being carried, had entered into the Ephesian land, for they arrived there at night and the women were there celebrating the Thesmophoria, then indeed the Ephesians, neither having heard beforehand how it was with the Chians, and seeing an army having entered into their land, altogether suspected them to be robbers and to be going against the women, they came to their aid all together and killed the Chians.
These, then, were encountering such fortunes. But Dionysius the Phocaean, when he learned that the affairs of the Ionians were ruined, taking three of the enemy's ships, sailed away not to Phocaea any longer, well knowing that it would be enslaved together with the rest of Ionia. Instead, he immediately sailed to Phoenicia as he was, and there, sinking merchant ships and taking much money, he sailed to Sicily. And from there, he set up as a pirate, attacking no Greeks, but Carthaginians and Tyrrhenians.
And the Persians, after they had conquered the Ionians in the naval battle, besieging Miletus from both land and sea and tunneling under the walls and bringing forth various devices, captured it in the sixth year from the revolt of Aristagoras and enslaved the city, so that the calamity coincided with the oracle that had come to pass concerning Miletus.
For the Argives, being in debt at Delphi concerning the salvation of their city, received a common oracle, which bore upon themselves, the Argives, and had an addition concerning the Milesians. Now, the part concerning the Argives I will mention when I come to that point in my account; but the addition which was made concerning the absent Milesians was as follows: "And then indeed, Miletus, deviser of evil works, you will become a feast and splendid gifts for many; and your wives will wash the feet of many long-haired men, and the temple of our Didymaean will be a care to others." Then indeed, this befell the Milesians, when most of the men were stretched out by the long-haired Persians, and the women and children were made slaves, and the temple at Didyma, both the shrine and the oracle, was plundered and set on fire. Of the wealth that was in this temple, I have made mention many times elsewhere in my account.
From there, the captured Milesians were led to Susa. And King Darius, doing them no other harm, settled them by the so-called Red Sea in the city of Ampe, beside which the Tigris River, flowing by, empties into the sea. Of the Milesian land, the Persians themselves held the area around the city and the plain, while the highland parts were given to the Carians of Pedasa to possess.
But when the Milesians suffered these things at the hands of the Persians, the Sybarites, who were dwelling in Laus and Scidrus, deprived of their city, did not repay the like to the Milesians, who, when Sybaris was captured by the Crotoniates, all, both young and old, shaved their heads and added great mourning; for these cities, indeed, were most especially alienated from each other of those we know. Not similarly, also, the Athenians. For the Athenians, indeed, made it clear that they were greatly grieved by the capture of Miletus in many ways, and indeed, when Phrynichus made a play "The Capture of Miletus" and taught it, the theater fell into tears, and they fined him a thousand drachmas as a reminder of domestic evils, and they ordered that no one should use this play.
Now Miletus was indeed desolate of the Milesians. And for the Samians, who had some possessions, what was done by their generals concerning the Medes did not please them at all. They thought that after the naval battle, they should immediately deliberate, before the tyrant Aeaces came to their land, to sail out to a colony and not to remain as slaves to the Medes and Aeaces. For the Zanclaeans from Sicily, at the same time, sent messengers to Ionia, inviting the Ionians to the Fair Coast, wishing to establish a city of the Ionians there. This Fair Coast, called so, is indeed of the Sicilians, but turned towards Tyrrhenia of Sicily. Therefore, when they were called upon, the Samians alone of the Ionians were sent, and with them the escaped Milesians. In this, something like this happened to come together.
For the Samians, while being transported to Sicily, happened to be among the Epizephyrian Locrians, and the Zanclaeans themselves and their king, whose name was Scythes, were trying to take a city of the Sicilians. Learning of this, the tyrant of Rhegium, Anaxilaus, who was then at odds with the Zanclaeans, joined the Samians and persuaded them that it was necessary to leave the Fair Coast, to which they were sailing, and to seize Zancle, which was deserted of men. When the Samians agreed and took Zancle, the Zanclaeans, as they learned that their city was taken, came to its aid and called upon Hippocrates, the tyrant of Gela, for he was their ally. But when Hippocrates came to them with his army to help, he bound Scythes, the sole ruler of the Zanclaeans, as he had lost the city, and sent him and his brother Pythogenes to the city of Inyx. As for the rest of the Zanclaeans, after making a common agreement with the Samians and giving and receiving oaths, he handed them over. The agreed-upon payment for him from the Samians was to receive half of all the movable goods and slaves in the city, and all the things in the fields were to be Hippocrates'. He himself held the greater part of the Zanclaeans as slaves, having bound them, and he gave three hundred of their leaders to the Samians to be slaughtered; however, the Samians did not do this.
Scythes, the sole ruler of the Zanclaeans, fled from Inyx to Himera, and from there he went to Asia and went up to King Darius; and Darius considered him to be the most just of all men who came from Greece to himself. For having asked the king, he went to Sicily and again from Sicily back to the king, in which, being greatly old and fortunate, he ended his life among the Persians. The Samians, having been freed from the Medes, had surrounded the most beautiful city of Zancle with ease.
After the naval battle that took place for Miletus, the Phoenicians, at the command of the Persians, brought Aeaces, the son of Syloson, to Samos, as he had become very valuable to them and had achieved great deeds. And for the Samians alone, of those who had revolted from Darius, due to the desertion of their ships in the naval battle, neither the city nor the temples were burned. But when Miletus was captured, the Persians immediately seized Caria, subduing some of the cities willingly, while they brought others to submission by force.
These things indeed thus happened. To Histiaeus, the Milesian, being around Byzantium and intercepting the Ionian merchant ships sailing out of the Black Sea, the events concerning Miletus were reported. He indeed entrusted the affairs around the Hellespont to Bisaltes, the son of Apollophanes, an Abydenian, and he himself, having Lesbians, sailed to Chios. And the Chian guard ships, not admitting him, engaged in battle in the Hollows, as they are called, of the Chian land. Of these indeed, he killed many, and of the remaining Chians, as they were indeed weakened from the naval battle, Histiaeus, having the Lesbians, prevailed, launching an attack from Polichne of Chios.
Indeed, it seems that when great evils are about to befall either a city or a nation, warning signs often appear. For the Chians, before these events, great signs occurred: they sent a chorus of a hundred and two young men to Delphi, and only two of these returned, while the other ninety-eight were taken away by a plague. And in the city, at the same time, just a little before the naval battle, the roof fell upon children who were learning letters, so that out of a hundred and twenty children, only one escaped. These signs the god showed to them, and after these things, the naval battle took hold, casting the city down to its knees, and upon the naval battle, Histiaeus came, leading the Lesbians. And with the Chians being in a weakened state, he easily brought about their downfall.
From there, Histiaeus marched against Thasos, leading numerous Ionians and Aeolians. While he was besieging Thasos, a message came to him that the Phoenicians were sailing back from Miletus to the rest of Ionia. Learning this, he left Thasos unconquered and hastened to Lesbos, leading his entire army. From Lesbos, with his army suffering from hunger, he crossed over to Atarneus, intending to gather corn from there and from the Mysian fields in the Caicus plain. In these regions, it happened that Harpagus, a Persian man, was a general of a not insignificant army. He, confronting Histiaeus as he disembarked, captured Histiaeus alive and destroyed most of his army.
Histiaeus was captured in this way: As the Greeks and the Persians were fighting for a long time at Malene in the region of Atarneus, the cavalry later charged and attacked the Greeks. This indeed was the work of the cavalry, and with the Greeks having been defeated, Histiaeus, hoping not to be killed by the king due to the present mistake, attempted to save his life in such a manner: As he was fleeing and was caught by a Persian man, and as he was about to be struck down by him, he changed to the Persian language and indicated himself to be Histiaeus the Milesian.
Now, if indeed, as he was captured, he was brought to King Darius, I think he would not have suffered any harm, and the king would have let go of the accusation against him. But now, because of these very things and so that he might not escape and become great again at the king's court, Artaphrenes, the governor of Sardis, and Harpagus, the one who captured him, when he was brought to Sardis, impaled his body there, and having embalmed his head, they brought it to King Darius in Susa. And Darius, learning these things and blaming those who did this because they did not bring him alive to his sight, ordered that Histiaeus' head be washed and wrapped well, and buried as a man who had greatly benefited both himself and the Persians.
This is how things went with Histiaeus. The Persian naval force, having spent the winter around Miletus, in the second year, as it set sail, easily captured the islands lying near the mainland, Chios, and Lesbos, and Tenedos. And whenever they would capture any of the islands, as they were taking each one, the barbarians would net the people. They would net them in this manner: a man, having touched another man's hand, would go from the northern sea to the southern sea, and then they would go through the whole island, hunting the people. They also captured the Ionian cities on the mainland in the same way, except they did not net the people: for it was not possible.
In this place, the Persian generals did not deceive the threats they had threatened the Ionians with, when they were encamped opposite them. For indeed, when they had gained power over the cities, they chose the most handsome boys and castrated them, making them eunuchs instead of being intact, and they took the most beautiful girls to the king. And indeed, they did this and they set fire to the cities with their temples. Thus, for the third time, the Ionians were enslaved: first by the Lydians, and then twice in a row by the Persians.
Then, departing from Ionia, the naval force sailed into all that was on the left side of the Hellespont; for the right side on the mainland had already been made subject to the Persians. Now, these are the regions in Europe near the Hellespont: the Chersonese, in which there are many cities, and Perinthus, and the forts towards Thrace, and Selymbria, and Byzantium. The Byzantines and those beyond in Calchedon did not even wait for the Phoenicians to sail against them, but they left their own land and went away into the Euxine Sea, and there they settled in the city of Mesambria. The Phoenicians, having burned these regions which had been deserted, turned towards Proconnesus and Artace; and having set these also on fire, they sailed again to the Chersonese to take the remaining cities, as many as they had not taken before. But they did not even sail against Cyzicus at first; for the Cyzicenes had already become subjects of the king before the expedition of the Phoenicians, having made an agreement with the governor in Dascyleum, Oebares, the son of Megabazus.
The Phoenicians conquered all the cities of the Chersonese except for the city of Cardia, where Miltiades, the son of Cimon and grandson of Stesagoras, ruled until then. Miltiades, the son of Cypselus, had previously acquired this rule in such a manner. The Thracian Dolonci held this Chersonese. So, these Dolonci, being oppressed by war by the Apsinthians, sent their kings to Delphi to consult the oracle about the war. The Pythia advised them to bring to their land the one who would first invite them to hospitality as they departed from the sanctuary. And the Dolonci, going along the Sacred Way through Phocis and Boeotia, found that no one invited them; so they turned towards Athens.
At that time in Athens, Pisistratus held all the power, but Miltiades, the son of Cypselus, was also quite influential, being of a family that raised four-horse chariots, with his ancient lineage tracing back to Aeacus and Aegina, and his more recent family being Athenian, with Philaeus, the son of Ajax, being the first of this family to become Athenian. This Miltiades, sitting on his porch, saw the Dolonci passing by, wearing foreign clothes and carrying spears, and he approached them and invited them for lodging and hospitality. They, accepting and being entertained by him, revealed the whole oracle and asked him to obey the god. Miltiades, upon hearing this, was immediately persuaded by the words, as he was both annoyed by the rule of Pisistratus and wanting to be out of his reach. Immediately, he was sent to Delphi, to inquire the oracle whether he should do what the Dolonci asked of him.
And with the Pythia also urging, thus indeed Miltiades, the son of Cypselus, having previously won the Olympic four-horse chariot race, then took all the Athenians who wished to partake in the expedition and sailed together with the Dolonci, and he took possession of the land; and those who brought him there established him as a tyrant. And first, he fortified the isthmus of the Chersonese from the city of Cardia to Pactye, so that the Apsinthians would not have the power to harm them by invading the land. And the isthmus is thirty-six stadia wide; and from this isthmus, the entire Chersonese inward is four hundred and twenty stadia in length.
So Miltiades, having fortified the neck of the Chersonese and repelled the Apsinthians in such a manner, first waged war against the Lampsacenes among the rest. And the Lampsacenes, having set an ambush, captured him alive. Now Miltiades had become esteemed by Croesus, the Lydian. So when Croesus learned of this, he sent a message and ordered the Lampsacenes to let Miltiades go, and if they did not, he threatened to wipe them out like a pine tree. And as the Lampsacenes were perplexed in their discussions about what Croesus meant by his threat to wipe them out like a pine tree, at last one of the elders learned the truth and said that the pine tree alone of all trees, when cut down, does not put forth any new shoot but is utterly destroyed. So, fearing Croesus, the Lampsacenes released Miltiades and let him go.
This man, indeed, escaped through Croesus, but afterwards he died childless, having handed over the rule and the possessions to Stesagoras, the son of his half-brother Cimon. And when he died, the people of the Chersonese offered sacrifices to him as was the custom for a founder, and they established a horse race and a gymnastic competition, in which no one from Lampsacus was allowed to compete. But during the war against the Lampsacenes, Stesagoras met his death childless, having been struck on the head with an axe in the town hall by a man who, in word, was a deserter but in deed, an enemy and a more violent man.
And when Stesagoras died in such a manner, the sons of Pisistratus sent Miltiades, the son of Cimon and brother of the deceased Stesagoras, to the Chersonese on a trireme to take over the affairs there. They had treated him well in Athens, as if they were not aware of the death of his father Cimon, which I will explain in another account how it happened. And when Miltiades arrived in the Chersonese, he stayed in his house, apparently honoring his brother Stesagoras. And when the people of the Chersonese learned of this, the rulers gathered from all the cities, and they came together in a common assembly as if to share in his grief, but they were bound by him. And so, Miltiades held the Chersonese, keeping a force of 500 men, and he married Hegesipyle, the daughter of Olorus, the king of the Thracians.
This Miltiades, son of Cimon, had recently come to the Chersonese, and upon his arrival, he encountered even more difficult matters than those he had previously faced. For in the third year before these events, he had fled from the Scythians. The nomadic Scythians, provoked by King Darius, had gathered together and driven as far as this Chersonese. Miltiades, not waiting for their approach, had fled from the Chersonese, from which the Scythians eventually departed, and the Dolonci people brought him back afterward. These things had indeed occurred in the third year prior to the time when he was then occupied.
Then, learning that the Phoenicians were in Tenedos, Miltiades, filling five triremes with his belongings, sailed away to Athens. And just as he set out from the city of Cardia, he sailed through the Black Gulf; he passed by the Chersonese, and the Phoenicians happened upon his ships. Miltiades himself, indeed, with four of the ships, took refuge in Imbros, but the Phoenicians, pursuing, captured the fifth of the ships. Of this ship, the eldest of Miltiades' sons, Metiochus, happened to be in command, not being from the daughter of Olorus the Thracian, but from another wife. And the Phoenicians captured him along with the ship, and learning that he was the son of Miltiades, they brought him to the king, thinking they would lay down a great favor, because Miltiades had accepted the plan among the Ionians to obey the Scythians' command, when the Scythians asked them to break up the bridge of boats and sail away to their own lands. But Darius, when the Phoenicians brought Metiochus, the son of Miltiades, did no harm to Metiochus, but rather many good things: for he gave him a house and possessions and a Persian wife, from whom children were born to him who were considered Persians. And Miltiades, from Imbros, arrived in Athens.
And during this year, from the Persians, nothing more happened that brought strife to the Ionians, but rather these things happened that were very useful to the Ionians during this year: Artaphrenes, the governor of Sardis, having summoned messengers from the cities, compelled the Ionians themselves to make agreements with each other, so that they would be law-abiding and not carry off and take from each other. And he compelled them to do these things, and having measured their lands by parasangs, which the Persians call thirty stadia, having measured by these, he set tributes for each, which according to the region continue to have from that time always even to me as they were arranged by Artaphrenes: and they were arranged almost according to the same as they had before. And these things were peaceful for them.
At the same time as spring, with the other generals having been dismissed by the king, Mardonius, the son of Gobryas, went down to the sea, leading a very large army of infantry and a large naval force, being a young man in age and having recently married the daughter of King Darius, Artozostre. And Mardonius, leading this army, when he came to Cilicia, he himself embarked on a ship and was carried along with the other ships, while other leaders led the infantry army to the Hellespont. And as Mardonius, sailing along Asia, arrived in Ionia, there I will tell a great wonder to those Greeks who did not accept the opinion of the seven Persians of Otanes, that it was necessary for the Persians to be ruled by democracy: for Mardonius, having put an end to all the tyrants of the Ionians, established democracies in the cities. And having done these things, he hastened to the Hellespont. And when a large amount of ships had been gathered and a large infantry army had been gathered as well, having crossed the Hellespont with the ships, they proceeded through Europe, and they proceeded towards Eretria and Athens.
These, then, were the pretexts for their expedition: but in their minds, they intended to subdue as many of the Greek cities as they could. Indeed, with their ships, they easily overpowered the Thasians, who did not even raise their hands in resistance, and with their land army, they enslaved the Macedonians, adding them to their existing subjects; for all the nations within Macedonia had already become subject to them. Crossing from Thasos, they traveled along the mainland up to Acanthus, and setting out from Acanthus, they attempted to sail around Athos. However, a great and unstoppable north wind struck them, causing severe damage and driving many of their ships onto the shores of Athos. It is said that around 300 ships were destroyed, and more than 20,000 men perished. For indeed, with this sea around Athos being extremely wild, some were destroyed by wild beasts as they were seized, others were dashed against the rocks, some could not swim and were destroyed for this reason, and others died from the cold.
The naval force indeed thus advanced, but Mardonius and the infantry, encamped in Macedonia, were attacked at night by the Brygi, Thracians. And the Brygi killed many of them, and wounded Mardonius himself. However, they themselves did not escape slavery at the hands of the Persians: for Mardonius did not leave these lands before he had made them subject. Having subdued them, he led the army back, having suffered greatly with the infantry against the Brygi and with the naval force around Athos. This expedition, having fought disgracefully, was dismissed to Asia.
In the second year of these events, Darius, first hearing that the Thasians were being incited to revolt by their neighbors, sent a messenger ordering them to dismantle their walls and transport their ships to Abdera. For indeed, the Thasians, having been besieged by Histiaeus of Miletus and having great revenues, used their wealth to build long warships and to surround themselves with stronger walls. Their income came both from the mainland and from the mines: from the gold mines in Scaptesyle, a total of eighty talents came in, and from those on Thasos itself, less than this, but still so much that the Thasians, having tax-free crops, received an annual income of two hundred talents from both the mainland and the mines, and when the most came in, three hundred.
And I myself saw these mines, and by far the most wondrous of them were those which the Phoenicians discovered, who with Thasos colonized this island, which now from this Thasos the Phoenician has received its name. And these Phoenician mines are in Thasos between the place called Aenyra and Coenyra, and opposite Samothrace, a great hill having been dug up in the search. This, indeed, now is such. And the Thasians, at the command of the king, both tore down their own wall and brought all their ships to Abdera.
After this, Darius attempted to find out what the Greeks had in mind, whether they intended to fight against him or to surrender themselves. Therefore, he sent heralds in different directions throughout Greece, commanding them to ask for earth and water for the king. Indeed, he sent these to Greece, and he sent other heralds to his own tribute-paying coastal cities, ordering them to build long ships and horse-transporting vessels.
So these cities were preparing accordingly, and to the heralds who came to Greece, many of the mainland people gave what the Persian demanded, and all the islanders to whom they came asking. And indeed, the other islanders gave earth and water to Darius, and also the Aeginetans. Having done this, the Athenians immediately took action against them, thinking that the Aeginetans had given in, intending to join the Persian in an attack against them, and gladly seizing the pretext, they went to Sparta and accused the Aeginetans of having betrayed Greece by their actions.
In response to this accusation, Cleomenes, son of Anaxandrides and king of the Spartans, went to Aegina, wishing to arrest the most guilty of the Aeginetans. But when he tried to arrest them, many of the Aeginetans opposed him, and among them, Crius, son of Polycritus, most of all, who said that he would not lead any rejoicing Aeginetan away; for he was doing these things without the Spartans' common consent, having been bribed by the Athenians with money; for he should have come with the other king to arrest them. He said these things based on a letter from Demaratus. Cleomenes, being driven out of Aegina, asked Crius what his name was; and he told him his own name. Then Cleomenes said to him, "Now indeed, bronze your horns, O ram, for you will face great trouble."
At this time in Sparta, Demaratus, the son of Ariston, was enduring and slandering Cleomenes, who was also a king of the Spartans, but from a less distinguished house, in no other respect less distinguished; for they were descended from the same ancestor. However, the house of Eurysthenes was somewhat more honored due to their seniority in birth.
For the Lacedaemonians, agreeing with no poet, say that Aristodemus, the son of Aristomachus, the son of Cleodaeus, the son of Hyllus, was king when he led them to this land, which they now possess, and not the sons of Aristodemus. And after no long time, Aristodemus' wife gave birth, and her name was Argeia; and they say that she was the daughter of Autesion, the son of Tisamenus, the son of Thersander, the son of Polynices. So she gave birth to twins, and Aristodemus, having seen his children, died from illness. And the Lacedaemonians who were then, wished according to the law to make the elder of the children king. But they did not yet have them, when they chose which one, so that both were alike and equal; and not being able to know, or even before this, they asked the mother who gave birth. And she said that she herself did not know and discern. Knowing indeed and saying this very thing, she wished if somehow both would become kings. So then the Lacedaemonians were at a loss, and being at a loss, they sent to Delphi, asking what they should use for the matter. And the Pythia commanded them to lead both the children as kings, but to honor more the elder. So then the Pythia took up these things for them, but for the Lacedaemonians, being at a loss no less how they would find the elder of them, a man of Messenia was supposed, whose name was Panites. And this Panites was supposed to say these things to the Lacedaemonians: to guard the mother when she gave birth, which of the children she washed and fed first; and if she always appeared to do the same thing, they would have everything as much as they sought and wished to find, but if she wandered and did this alternately, it would be clear to them that she knew no more, and they would turn to another way. So then the Spartans, according to the suggestions of the Messenian, guarded the mother of Aristodemus' children, and they took her doing the same thing, honoring the first with food and baths, not knowing for what reason she was guarded. And they took the child that was honored to the mother as if it was the first-born, and they raised him in public; and the name was given to him, Eurysthenes, and to the other, Procles. These, having grown into men, they say were at odds with each other for the whole time of their lives, and their descendants likewise continued.
The Lacedaemonians alone of the Greeks say these things; but I write these things according to what is said by the Greeks, that these Dorian kings are rightly traced back to Perseus, the son of Danae, with no god intervening, and are shown to be Greeks; for by now they were complete Greeks. I stopped at Perseus for this reason, but I did not take it up further still, because there is no mortal father's name for Perseus, just as there is for Heracles with Amphitryon. So then, using the correct lineage up to Perseus, it seems to me to be rightly said; but from Danae, the daughter of Acrisius, if one were to trace their fathers upwards, the leaders of the Dorians would appear to be Egyptians by birth.
These things, indeed, now according to what the Greeks say, have been genealogized: but as the account from the Persians is told, Perseus himself, being Assyrian, became Greek, but not the ancestors of Perseus: those who admit the fathers of Acrisius to have no kinship with Perseus, these are, just as the Greeks say, Egyptians.
And let these things now be said concerning them. As for what being Egyptians and what having received they took the kingdoms of the Dorians, for others have spoken about them, we shall leave these: but the other things which they did not take hold of, I shall make mention of these.
Indeed, the Spartans have granted these privileges to their kings: two priesthoods, one for Zeus Lacedaemon and one for Zeus of Heaven, and to wage war against any land they wish, with no Spartan being able to hinder them, unless they themselves are involved in the campaign. And when they go to war, the kings go first and return last; and a hundred chosen men guard them in the army; and they may use as many sheep and goats in their expeditions as they wish, and they receive the hides and backs of all the sacrificed animals.
These are the rights during wartime, and the other rights during peacetime are granted to them as follows. When there is a public sacrifice, the kings are seated first at the feast, and they begin the meal, receiving double portions of everything compared to the other guests, and they have the responsibility of making libations and receiving the hides of the sacrificed animals. At every new moon and the seventh day of the month, a full-grown sacrificial animal is given to each of them from the public treasury, as well as a bushel of barley-meal and a Laconian quart of wine for Apollo, and they have reserved seats of honor at all the games. They have the right to appoint any citizens they wish as protectors of foreigners, and each king chooses two Pythians. The Pythians are the interpreters of the oracle at Delphi, and they dine with the kings at public expense. If the kings do not come to the public dinner, they are sent two choenices of barley-meal and a cotyle of wine to their homes, but if they are present, they receive double portions of everything. The same honor is given to them when invited to a private dinner. They are the guardians of the oracles that are given, and the Pythians also know them. The kings alone judge the following cases: concerning an unwedded heiress whose father has died, concerning public roads, and if someone wishes to adopt a child, it must be done in the presence of the kings. They sit with the twenty-eight elders in council meetings, and if they do not attend, their closest relatives hold the king's voting rights, giving two extra votes in addition to their own.
These things indeed are given to the living kings from the commonwealth of the Spartans, and when they die, these things happen. Horsemen announce the event throughout all Laconia, and women going around the city beat cauldrons. When this happens, it is necessary for two free people from each household to be defiled, both a man and a woman: if they do not do this, great penalties are imposed. The law for the Lacedaemonians concerning the deaths of the kings is the same as for the barbarians in Asia: for most of the barbarians use the same law concerning the deaths of the kings. For when a king of the Lacedaemonians dies, it is necessary for a compulsory number of the neighboring people to go to the funeral from all Lacedaemon, except for the Spartans. When these, and the helots, and the Spartans themselves are gathered together in the same place, many thousands mixed with the women, they willingly strike their foreheads and use unceasing lamentation, saying that the last king who has died was always the best. And whoever of the kings dies in war, they make a statue for him and carry it out on a well-spread couch. And when they bury him, there is no assembly for ten days, nor does an election come together, but they mourn for these days.
And they have this other thing in common with the Persians: when a king dies and another one becomes king, this one who comes in sets free whoever of the Spartans owed anything to the king or to the public. And on the other hand, among the Persians, the one being established as king remits the tribute owed before to all the cities.
The Lacedaemonians also have this in common with the Egyptians: their heralds, flute-players, and cooks acquire the ancestral crafts, and a flute-player's child becomes a flute-player, a cook's child becomes a cook, and a herald's child becomes a herald. Others do not take their positions by having a loud voice or other skills to persuade them, but they carry out their duties according to their birthright. That's how things work in their society.
Thus, indeed, it happens. At that time, Cleomenes being in Aegina and working for the common good of Greece, Demaratus slandered him, not caring so much for the Aeginetans as being driven by envy and jealousy. Cleomenes, having returned from Aegina, planned to remove Demaratus from the kingship, making an attack on him through such an affair. Ariston, ruling in Sparta and marrying two women, had no children. For he himself did not recognize that he was the cause of this, so he married a third woman: and this is how he married her. There was a friend of his among the Spartans, a man to whom Ariston was especially attached among the citizens. This man happened to have a wife who was by far the most beautiful of the women in Sparta, and yet she had become the most beautiful from being the ugliest. For when she was unattractive in appearance, her nurse, seeing that she was the daughter of wealthy people and was unattractive, and also seeing that her parents were distressed by her appearance, having learned all these things, she devised the following plan: she carried her every day to the sanctuary of Helen. This sanctuary is in the place called Therapne, above the sanctuary of Phoebus. Whenever the nurse brought her there, she would stand beside the statue and beseech the goddess to release the child from her ugliness. And indeed, one day as the nurse was leaving the sanctuary, a woman is said to have appeared to her, and having appeared, she asked her what she was carrying in her arms, and the nurse told her that she was carrying a child, but the woman ordered her to show it, and the nurse said she could not: for she was forbidden to show it to anyone by those who had given birth to it: but the woman absolutely ordered her to show it to herself. Seeing that the woman was very eager to see it, the nurse then showed the child to her: and the woman, having stroked the child's head, said that she would be the most beautiful of all the women in Sparta. From that day on, her appearance changed. And when she had come of age for marriage, Agetus, the son of Alcidas, married her: this man was indeed the friend of Ariston.
And indeed, Ariston was smitten with love for this woman, and he devised such a plan: he himself promised his friend, whose wife this woman was, that he would give him one of his own possessions, whichever the friend chose, and he urged his friend to give him the same in return. The friend, fearing nothing about his wife, seeing that she was also a wife to Ariston, agreed to this. And upon this, they imposed oaths. After this, Ariston gave that which was chosen from his own possessions to Agetus, and seeking the same in return from him, he then tried to take away his friend's wife. The friend, however, said that he agreed to everything else except this one thing. Nevertheless, being compelled by both the oath and the deceitful scheme, he allowed his wife to be taken away.
Thus indeed, Ariston married his third wife, having sent away his second. And in a shorter time, not even completing ten months, this woman gave birth to this Demaratus. And one of the servants, sitting in the vestibule with the ephors, announces to him that a son has been born. And he, knowing the time when he married the woman and counting the months on his fingers, swore and said, "It could not be mine." The ephors heard this, but they did not make any issue of it immediately. The child grew, and Ariston regretted what he had said, for he considered Demaratus to be his son to the utmost. And he gave him the name Demaratus for this reason: before these events, all the Spartans had made a prayer for Ariston, as a man who was distinguished among all the kings who had been in Sparta, that a son might be born to him.
For this reason, indeed, the name Demaratus was given to him: and as time went on, Ariston died, and Demaratus held the kingship. But it was necessary, as it seemed, for these things having become unknown to be revealed and to cause Demaratus to cease from the kingship because of the... Demaratus had greatly quarreled with Cleomenes before, when he had led the army away from Eleusis, and indeed even then, when Cleomenes went against the Aeginetans who had sided with the Medes.
So, Cleomenes, desiring to exact revenge, made an agreement with Leotychides, the son of Menares, the son of Agis, who belonged to the same family as Demaratus, on the condition that, if he should establish him as king instead of Demaratus, he would join him against the Aeginetans. Now Leotychides was an enemy of Demaratus, having become so for the following reason: when Leotychides was about to marry Percalus, the daughter of Chilon, the son of Demarmenus, Demaratus plotted against him and deprived Leotychides of the marriage, having himself first seized Percalus and taken her as his wife. On account of this, the enmity of Leotychides towards Demaratus had arisen, and then, at the urging of Cleomenes, Leotychides swore an oath against Demaratus, saying that he was not ruling the Spartans rightfully, not being the son of Ariston. And after the oath, he pursued legal action, bringing up that word which Ariston had spoken at the time when the servant announced to him that a son had been born to him, and he, having calculated the months, swore that it was not his. Relying on this statement, Leotychides declared that Demaratus was neither born of Ariston nor rightfully ruling Sparta, presenting as witnesses those ephors who happened to be present at that time and had heard these things from Ariston.
And finally, when there were disputes about them, it seemed good to the Spartans to consult the oracle at Delphi whether Demaratus was the son of Ariston. However, due to the influence of Cleomenes on the Pythia, there, Cleomenes pretends to be Cobon, the son of Aristophantus, a man of great power in Delphi, and Cobon persuades Perialla, the prophetess, to say what Cleomenes wanted to be said. Thus, indeed, the Pythia, when asked by the ambassadors, judged that Demaratus was not the son of Ariston. But later in time, these things became known, and both Cobon fled from Delphi and Perialla, the prophetess, was deprived of her honor.
The removal of Demaratus from the kingship indeed happened in this way, and Demaratus fled from Sparta to the Medes due to such a disgrace. After the cessation of his kingship, Demaratus was chosen for a different office. Now there were indeed Gymnopaidiai, and as Demaratus was watching, Leotychides, who had already become king in his place, sent his servant to mock and ridicule, asking Demaratus what sort of thing it was to rule after being a king. He, being pained by the question, said that he himself had already experienced both, but the other had not, and that this very questioning would be the beginning for the Lacedaemonians of either great misfortune or great prosperity. Having said these things and covering himself, he went from the theater to his own house, and immediately having prepared, he sacrificed an ox to Zeus, and having sacrificed, he called his mother.
When his mother arrived, Demaratus placed some of the animal entrails in her hands and pleaded with her, saying, "O mother, I call upon the gods and all the others, and upon this guardian Zeus, to tell me the truth, who is my father in truth. For Leotychides indeed said in the quarrels, speaking that you, being pregnant from your former husband, thus came to Ariston; and others, speaking the more foolish tale, say that you came from the servants, the ass-keeper, and that I am his child. Therefore, I come to you by the gods to tell the truth. For neither, if indeed you have done any of the things spoken, have you alone done them, but with many others; and the tale is much in Sparta that Ariston had no seed to make children; for he would have begotten children from his former wives."
He indeed spoke such things, and she answered with these words: "O child, since you beseech me to speak the truth, the whole truth shall be revealed to you. When Ariston brought me to his house, on the third night, a phantom resembling Ariston appeared to me. It lay with me and then placed the garlands it had on me. The phantom left, and after that, Ariston came. When he saw me wearing the garlands, he asked who had given them to me. I said it was him, but he did not accept it. I swore, saying that he was not right to deny it, for he had come a little earlier, lain with me, and given me the garlands. Seeing me swear, Ariston understood that the matter was divine. The garlands appeared to be from the hero's shrine established near the courtyard doors, which they call Astrabacus', and the seers declared that this very hero was the one. Thus, my child, you have everything, as much as you wish to learn: either you are born from this hero, and your father is the hero Astrabacus, or Ariston, for I conceived you that night. The accusation your enemies cling to most, saying that Ariston himself, when your birth was announced to him, did not claim you as his own in front of many listeners (for the time, the ten months, had not yet been completed), he cast away that word in ignorance of such matters. For women give birth after nine months and seven months, and not all complete ten months; I, my child, bore you after seven months. And Ariston himself, not long after, realized that he had cast away that word in folly. Do not accept other stories about your birth; for you have heard the most truthful of all. May the wives of Leotychides and those who speak such things give birth to children from ass-keepers."
She indeed spoke these things, and he, having learned what he wanted and taken provisions, went to Elis, saying in his account that he was going to Delphi to consult the oracle. But the Lacedaemonians, suspecting that Demaratus was attempting to escape, pursued him. And somehow Demaratus, having crossed over, arrived at Zacynthus from Elis. The Lacedaemonians, having crossed over, seized him and took away his servants. But after, for the Zacynthians did not give him up, he crossed over from there to Asia to King Darius. And he received him with great honor and gave him land and cities. Thus Demaratus arrived in Asia and, having used such fortune, shone forth frequently among the Lacedaemonians with both deeds and opinions, and indeed also, having won an Olympic victory for them with a four-horse chariot, he added this, being the only one of all the kings who had been in Sparta to do this.
After Demaratus was deposed, Leutychides, the son of Menares, succeeded to the kingship, and he had a son, Zeuxidemus, whom some Spartans called Cyniscus. This Zeuxidemus did not become king of Sparta: for he died before Leutychides, leaving a son, Archidamus. Deprived of Zeuxidemus, Leutychides married a second wife, Eurydame, who was the sister of Menius and the daughter of Diactorides; from her, he had no male offspring, but a daughter, Lampito, whom Archidamus, the son of Zeuxidemus, married, given to him by Leutychides.
Indeed, Leutychides did not grow old in Sparta either, but he paid such a penalty to Demaratus for these reasons. He led the Lacedaemonians to Thessaly, and when everything was ready to be subdued, he accepted a large sum of silver as a bribe. However, he was caught in the act in the camp, holding a sleeve full of silver, and he fled from Sparta after being brought to trial. His house was demolished as well. He fled to Tegea and met his end there.
These things indeed happened later in time; but then, when the matter concerning Demaratus was resolved for Cleomenes, he immediately took Leutychides and went against the Aeginetans, having a great anger against them because of the insult. Thus, neither did the Aeginetans continue to resist in their defense, as both kings came upon them, and they selected ten men of the Aeginetans who were most worthy in wealth and birth: they led not only others but also Crius, the son of Polycritus, and Casambus, the son of Aristocrates, who held the greatest power. And having brought them to the land of Attica, they handed them over as hostages to the Athenians, who were the most hated enemies of the Aeginetans.
After these things, Cleomenes, having become exposed for his deceitful plan against Demaratus, took fear of the Spartans and secretly withdrew to Thessaly. From there, arriving in Arcadia, he engaged in newer affairs, uniting the Arcadians against Sparta, bringing other oaths to them, that they would indeed follow him wherever he might lead, and indeed he was eager to lead the leading men of the Arcadians to the city of Nonacris, making them swear by the water of the Styx. In this city, it is said by the Arcadians that the water of the Styx is located, and indeed it is something like this: a small amount of water appearing from a rock drips into a hollow, and a circle of stone surrounds the hollow. Nonacris, in which this spring happens to be, is a city of Arcadia near Pheneus.
When the Lacedaemonians learned that Cleomenes was doing these things, they became afraid and brought him back to Sparta, where he had ruled before. But when he returned, he was immediately seized by a madness, as he had been somewhat unstable before: for whenever he met a Spartan, he would strike him in the face with his scepter. As he was doing these things and had become insane, his relatives bound him in stocks. But when he saw that the guard was alone, he asked for a dagger. At first, the guard did not want to give it, but Cleomenes threatened him with what he would do to him later, and fearing the threats, the guard (who was one of the helots) gave him the dagger. Cleomenes, taking the iron, began to mutilate himself from his shins: for cutting the flesh lengthwise, he went from his shins to his thighs, and from his thighs to his hips and his flanks, until he reached his belly, and cutting it across, he died in such a manner, as most Greeks say, because the Pythia had revealed the things concerning Demaratus, but as the Athenians alone say, because he had attacked Eleusis and had cut the sacred precinct of the gods, and as the Argives say, because he had killed the Argives who had taken refuge from the battle in their temple at Argos and had cut them down, and having the sacred grove in his power, he had set it on fire.
For when Cleomenes was consulting the oracle at Delphi, he was told that he would capture Argos. Then, leading the Spartans, he arrived at the river Erasinus, which is said to flow from the Stymphalian lake. For this lake, disappearing into an unseen chasm, reappears in Argos, and from there the water is already called Erasinus by the Argives. So when Cleomenes arrived at this river, he offered sacrifices to it. And for he did not at all receive favorable omens to cross it, he said that he admired the Erasinus for not betraying its citizens, but nevertheless, the Argives would not rejoice. After this, he withdrew the army and led it down to Thyrea, and having sacrificed a bull to the sea, he brought them by ships to both the land of Tiryns and Nauplia.
The Argives, learning of these things, went to the coast to help. But when they were near Tiryns, in a place called Hesipeia, they sat down opposite the Lacedaemonians, leaving only a small gap between them. There, the Argives did not fear the open battle, but rather that they might be taken by deceit. For indeed, the oracle concerning this matter had been given to them by the Pythia, which was common to both them and the Milesians, saying thus: "But when the female, having conquered the male, drives him away and takes glory among the Argives, she will then make many Argive women tear their cheeks. Thus, at some time, one will say, and of the men to come, the dread serpent, thrice-coiled, perished, tamed by the spear." All these things, having come together, caused fear for the Argives. And indeed, in response to this, it seemed good to them to make use of the enemy's herald, and they made a plan such as this: that whenever the Spartan herald signaled something to the Lacedaemonians, the Argives would do the same thing.
When Cleomenes learned that the Argives were doing whatever their own herald signaled, he instructed them that when the herald signaled to have breakfast, then they should take up their arms and advance against the Argives. This indeed happened as a result of the Lacedaemonians: for when the Argives were having breakfast according to the proclamation, they attacked, and they killed many of them, and they guarded many more who had fled to the sacred grove of Argos, surrounding them.
Then Cleomenes did the following. Having deserters with him and learning from them, he sent a herald to call out by name the Argives who had taken refuge in the sanctuary, saying that he had their ransoms. Ransoms are set at two minae per captive man for the Peloponnesians to pay. So, Cleomenes, calling out about fifty of the Argives one by one, killed them. These things happening were hidden from the rest in the sacred precinct: for since the grove was dense, those inside did not see what those outside were doing, until indeed one of them climbed a tree and saw the deed being done. Therefore, no longer being called out, they went forth.
At that point, Cleomenes ordered each of the captured men to surround the sacred grove with wood, and when they obeyed, he set fire to the grove. As it was already burning, he inquired of one of the deserters to which god the grove belonged; the man said it was Argos'. When Cleomenes heard this, he let out a great groan and said, "Oh Apollo, god of oracles, you have greatly deceived me by saying that I would capture Argos; I suppose this is the fulfillment of that prophecy."
After these things, Cleomenes sent the greater part of the army away to Sparta, and he himself, taking a thousand of the best men, went to the temple of Hera to sacrifice. But when he wanted to sacrifice on the altar, the priest forbade him, saying it was not lawful for a stranger to sacrifice there. Cleomenes then ordered the helots to take the priest away from the altar and whip him, and he himself sacrificed. Having done these things, he went away to Sparta.
After returning, his enemies brought him before the ephors, saying that he had taken a bribe not to capture Argos, although it was easy for him to do so. He replied to them, whether speaking falsely or truthfully, I cannot say for certain, but he said that when he had taken the temple of Argos, he thought the oracle's prophecy had been fulfilled. Therefore, he did not think it was right to attempt the city until he had consulted the sacrifices and learned whether the god would give it to him or stand in his way. While sacrificing in the temple of Hera, a flame of fire burst forth from the statue's chest, and he himself learned the truth that he would not capture Argos. For if the flame had come from the head of the statue, he would have taken the city to its utmost extent, but since it came from the chest, he had accomplished everything the god wanted to happen. Saying these things, he seemed to the Spartans to be speaking both credibly and reasonably, and he escaped his pursuers by a great deal.
Argos indeed of men was bereft so that their slaves held all the affairs, both ruling and governing, until the sons of the fallen men grew up. Then these, reclaiming Argos for themselves, expelled them. And the slaves, being driven out, held Tiryns by force. For a while indeed there was peace between them, but then to the slaves came a man, a prophet, Cleander, being of Phigalean descent from Arcadia. This man persuaded the slaves to attack their masters. From this indeed there was a war for them for a long time, until at last the Argives prevailed with great difficulty.
Now indeed the Argives say that Cleomenes went mad and perished miserably because of these things; but the Spartans themselves say that Cleomenes went mad not from any divine cause, but having associated with the Scythians, he became a heavy drinker and from this went mad. For the nomad Scythians, since Darius had invaded their land, were eager to take revenge on him, and having sent to Sparta, they made an alliance and agreed that it was necessary for the Scythians themselves to attempt to invade the Median land by the Phasis River, and for the Spartans to command them to set out from Ephesus and then to meet in the same place. They say that Cleomenes, when the Scythians arrived for this purpose, associated with them greatly, and associating more than was fitting, he learned heavy drinking from them; and from this, the Spartans think he went mad. And from so much, as they themselves say, when they want to drink more strongly, they say "Scythian-like." Thus indeed the Spartans speak about Cleomenes; but to me it seems that Cleomenes paid this penalty to Demaratus.
Upon the death of Cleomenes, when the Aeginetans learned of it, they sent messengers to Sparta to complain about Leutychides concerning the hostages held in Athens. The Lacedaemonians, having gathered a court, judged that the Aeginetans had been mistreated by Leutychides, and they condemned him to be handed over to Aegina in exchange for the men held in Athens. But as the Aeginetans were about to take Leutychides away, Theasides, son of Leoprepes, a respected man in Sparta, said to them, "What do you plan to do, men of Aegina? To take away the king of the Spartans, having been handed over by his fellow citizens? If now the Spartans have judged this in anger, beware that they do not later bring total destruction and evil upon your land, if you do these things." Hearing this, the Aeginetans refrained from taking him away, and they made use of an agreement such as this: Leutychides would go with them to Athens and give back the men to the Aeginetans.
When Leutychides arrived in Athens and demanded the return of the hostages, the Athenians, not wanting to give them back, made excuses, saying that there were two kings who had entrusted the hostages to them, and it was not right to give them back to one without the other. Leutychides responded by saying that whether they chose to return the hostages or not, they should hear a story about trust from Sparta. He told them about a man named Glaucus, the son of Epicydes, who lived three generations ago and was known for his exceptional sense of justice. A man from Miletus, hearing of Glaucus' reputation, decided to entrust half of his wealth to him for safekeeping, as he believed that Ionia was unstable compared to the Peloponnese. Glaucus agreed to keep the money and accepted tokens as proof of the deposit. After a long time, the sons of the man from Miletus came to Sparta, presented the tokens to Glaucus, and asked for their father's money back. Glaucus, however, claimed not to remember the agreement and asked for four months to consider the matter. Meanwhile, he went to Delphi to consult the oracle about whether he should keep the money by swearing an oath. The oracle warned him that although he might benefit from lying, the consequences would be dire for his family and descendants. Upon hearing this, Glaucus begged for forgiveness and was told that tempting the god was just as bad as committing the deed. He then returned to the sons of the man from Miletus and gave them their money back. Leutychides concluded his story by revealing that Glaucus' family line had been wiped out, emphasizing the importance of honoring a trust and returning what was entrusted when asked. The Athenians, after hearing this story, still refused to return the hostages to Leutychides.
But the Athenians did not say they would return the hostages, and Leutychides spoke to them thus: "O Athenians, do whichever you yourselves wish: for indeed, by returning the hostages you do what is right, and by not returning them, you do the opposite. However, I wish to tell you a story about a deposit that took place in Sparta. We Spartans say that in Lacedaemon, three generations ago from me, there was a man named Glaucus, the son of Epicydes. We say that this man surpassed all others in every respect, and especially in his reputation for justice, among all who lived in Lacedaemon at that time. We say that the following happened to him over time: A man from Miletus came to Sparta, wishing to speak with Glaucus about the following matter: 'I am a Milesian, and I have come to you, Glaucus, wishing to benefit from your justice. For indeed, throughout all of Greece and even in Ionia, there was much talk of your justice. I considered this and thought that Ionia is always in danger, while the Peloponnese is securely established, and that money never stays in the same hands. So, after considering and deliberating, I decided to entrust half of my entire wealth to you, knowing well that it will be safe with you. Please accept this money and these tokens, and whoever comes to you with these tokens, give the money back to them.' The man who came from Miletus said this, and Glaucus accepted the deposit on the terms mentioned. After a long time had passed, the sons of the man who had deposited the money came to Sparta. They spoke with Glaucus and showed him the tokens, demanding the money back. Glaucus, however, responded evasively, saying: 'I do not remember the matter, nor do I have any knowledge of what you are saying. I wish to remember and do everything that is just: for if I received the money, I should rightly return it, and if I did not receive it in the first place, I will use the laws of the Greeks against you. So, I postpone this matter for a decision in the fourth month from now.' The Milesians, considering themselves robbed of their money, left, while Glaucus went to Delphi to consult the oracle. When he asked the oracle if he should take the money by swearing an oath, the Pythia responded with these verses: 'Glaucus, son of Epicydes, it is immediately profitable to win by an oath and seize the money. Swear, for death awaits even the man who swears justly. But the child of an oath is nameless, with neither hands nor feet, and swiftly pursues until it destroys the entire family and the whole house. The generation of a just man is better afterward.' Hearing this, Glaucus begged the god for forgiveness for what he had said. The Pythia said that attempting to deceive the god was just as powerful as actually doing it. Glaucus then summoned the Milesian guests and returned the money to them. The reason this story was told to you, Athenians, will be explained: now there is no descendant of Glaucus, nor any hearth considered to be Glaucus', and his family has been completely uprooted from Sparta. Thus, it is good not even to think about a deposit other than to return it when asked by those who demand it." Leutychides, having said this, left, as the Athenians still did not listen to him. The Aeginetans, before giving justice for their earlier offenses against the Athenians, which they had committed to please the Thebans, did the following: complaining about the Athenians and claiming to be wronged, they prepared to take revenge on the Athenians. For there was a festival at Sunium for the Athenians, which took place every five years. The Aeginetans, having ambushed the sacred ship, captured it full of the most important Athenians, and having taken the men, they bound them.
But the Athenians, having suffered these things at the hands of the Aeginetans, no longer hesitated to devise every possible scheme against the Aeginetans. For there was a man called Nicodromus, son of Cnoethus, in Aegina, a man of repute, who, blaming the Aeginetans for his previous expulsion from the island, and learning then that the Athenians were hanging the Aeginetans to do them harm, conspired with the Athenians to betray Aegina, having informed them of the day on which he would undertake the action and when they should come to provide assistance.
After these things, indeed, according to the agreements with the Athenians, Nicodromus seizes the so-called Old City, but the Athenians do not arrive in time: for their ships were not available to fight against the Aeginetans. While, therefore, they were asking the Corinthians to provide them with ships, their plan was ruined. The Corinthians, however, who were at that time their greatest friends, gave the Athenians twenty ships when they asked, charging five drachmas each: for it was not allowed by law to give them as a gift. So, having received these ships and their own, and having filled all seventy ships, they sailed to Aegina and were one day late for the agreed-upon time.
But Nicodromus, as the Athenians did not arrive at the appointed time, got on a ship and fled from Aegina; and with him, other Aeginetans followed, to whom the Athenians gave Sunium to inhabit. From there, these people, setting out, both carried on and led the Aeginetans who were on the island.
Indeed, these things happened later. But the wealthy of the Aeginetans, when the common people rose up against them with Nicodromus, prevailed, and then, having captured them, they led them away to be killed. From this, a curse befell them, which they were unable to avert by making sacrifices, but they were driven out of the island before the goddess became propitious to them. For having captured seven hundred of the common people, they led them away as if to be killed, and one of these, having escaped his bonds, fled to the entrance of Demeter the Lawgiver, and seizing the door handles, he held on. But when they were unable to pull him away, they cut off his hands and led him away thus, and those hands remained attached to the door handles.
These things indeed the Aeginetans themselves did, and to the Athenians they came to fight a naval battle with seventy ships. Having been defeated in the naval battle, they called upon the same ones as before, the Argives. And indeed, these ones no longer helped them, blaming that Aeginetan ships were forcibly taken by Cleomenes and held in the Argolid land and went together with the Lacedaemonians, and men from Sicyonian ships went together with the same invasion. And a fine was imposed on them by the Argives to pay a thousand talents, five hundred each. Now the Sicyonians, admitting their wrongdoing, agreed to pay a hundred talents to be free from penalty, but the Aeginetans neither agreed nor were they more compliant. Therefore, because of these things, when they were in need, no one from the Argive public helped them anymore, but volunteers went up to a thousand. And a man named Eurybates, a man who trained in the pentathlon, led them as a general. Most of these ones did not return back, but they met their end by the Athenians in Aegina. And the general himself, Eurybates, fighting in single combat, killed three men in such a manner, but he died by the fourth, Sophanes, the son of Deceles.
The Aeginetans, encountering the Athenians in disorder, engaged them with their ships and were victorious, and they captured four of their ships along with the men themselves.
Indeed, war was joined for the Athenians against the Aeginetans. The Persian, however, was doing his own business, so that the servant always reminded him to remember the Athenians, and with the Pisistratidae sitting near and slandering the Athenians, at the same time Darius, wanting and holding onto this pretext, to overthrow those of Greece who did not give him earth and water. Indeed, Mardonius, having acted poorly with the fleet, he releases from the generalship, and having accepted other generals, he sent them against both Eretria and Athens, both Datis, being a Mede by birth, and Artaphrenes, the son of Artaphrenes, his own nephew. And having instructed, he sent them away to enslave Athens and Eretria and to bring up to his sight the slaves.
When these generals, having been appointed, traveled from the king and arrived at the Aleian plain in Cilicia, bringing with them a large and well-equipped land army, there they encamped, and the entire naval force assigned to each came upon them, and the horse-transport ships also arrived, which Darius had previously, in the former year, ordered his tribute-paying subjects to prepare. Having loaded the horses onto these ships and having embarked the land army onto the ships, they sailed with six hundred triremes to Ionia. From there, however, they did not keep the ships straight along the mainland of the Hellespont and Thrace, but setting out from Samos, they made their voyage through Icarium and by way of the islands, as it seems to me, fearing most the circumnavigation of Athos, because in the former year, having attempted this route, they had suffered greatly in the passage. Moreover, Naxos also compelled them, not having been captured earlier.
And when they approached Naxos from the Icarian Sea, for indeed the Persians first intended to wage war against it, remembering that the Naxians had previously fled to the mountains and did not withstand them, the Persians, having enslaved those whom they captured, burned both the temples and the city. And having done these things, they set sail for the other islands.
While they were doing these things, the Delians themselves, having left Delos, went fleeing to Tenos. As the army sailed down, Datis, sailing ahead, did not allow the ships to anchor near Delos, but across in Rhenaea. And he, learning where the Delians were, sent a herald and spoke to them as follows: "Sacred men, why do you flee, not understanding my intentions? For I myself think so much, and it has been sent to me by the king, that in this land the two gods were born, not to harm it, neither the land itself nor its inhabitants. Now then, go back to your own possessions and inhabit the island." Having proclaimed these things to the Delians, after weighing down three hundred talents of frankincense on the altar, he burned it as an offering.
After doing these things, indeed, Datis sailed with the army towards Eretria first, taking along both Ionians and Aeolians. And after this, Delos was moved, as the Delians said, both first and last until my time. And this, indeed, the god showed as a sign to men of the evils that were going to be. For during Darius, the son of Hystaspes, and Xerxes, the son of Darius, and Artaxerxes, the son of Xerxes, three successive generations, more evils happened to Greece than in twenty other generations before Darius, some coming from the Persians themselves, and others from the leading men warring about the rule. Thus, it was not unfitting for Delos to be moved, which was previously unmoved. And it was written in an oracle about it thus: "I will move even Delos, though unmoved before." And these names can be translated into the Greek language: Darius as "the Doer," Xerxes as "the Warrior," and Artaxerxes as "the Great Warrior." The Greeks would rightly call these kings thus according to their own language.
The barbarians, as they sailed away from Delos, approached the islands, and from there they both took up an army and took the children of the islanders as hostages. As they sailed around the islands and came to Carystos, the Carystians did not give them hostages nor did they say they would wage war against neighboring cities, saying that they were besieging Eretria and Athens, where they were cutting off their land. The Carystians then stood by the Persians' opinion.
When the Eretrians learned that the Persian army was sailing against them, they asked the Athenians to become their allies. The Athenians did not refuse their assistance, but gave them the four thousand cleruchs who were cultivating the land of the horse-breeding Chalcidians as avengers. However, there was no sound plan among the Eretrians, who sent for the Athenians but were devising double-minded ideas. For some of them planned to leave the city to the heights of Euboea, while others, expecting personal gains from the Persian, were preparing to bring about betrayal. Learning of both these matters as they stood, Aeschines, the son of Nothon, being foremost among the Eretrians, informed the arriving Athenians of all the present affairs, and he asked them to depart to their own land, so that they would not be destroyed along with them. And the Athenians, persuaded by Aeschines' advice, complied.
And these men, having crossed over to Oropus, saved themselves: but the Persians, sailing, seized the ships of the Eretrian land at Temenos and Choereae and Aegilea, and having seized these places, they immediately drove out horses and prepared as if they were going to attack the enemies. The Eretrians, however, did not make a plan to go out and fight, but rather to guard the walls, they cared about this, since they had agreed not to abandon the city. With a strong attack being made against the wall, many on both sides fell for six days: but on the seventh, Euphorbus, the son of Alkimachos, and Philagrus, the son of Kyneos, men of the citizens who were esteemed, betrayed the city to the Persians. And they, having entered the city, plundered the temples and set them on fire, avenging the temples that had been burned in Sardis, and they enslaved the people according to the orders of Darius.
Having taken possession of Eretria and waiting a few days, they sailed to the land of Attica, accomplishing much and seeming to do the same things to the Athenians as they had done to the Eretrians. For Marathon was the most suitable place in Attica for riding horses and was closest to Eretria; to this place Hippias, the son of Pisistratus, led them.
When the Athenians learned of this, they too went to Marathon. They were led by ten generals, of whom the tenth was Miltiades. His father, Cimon, son of Stesagoras, was forced to flee from Athens by Pisistratus, son of Hippocrates. While in exile, Cimon happened to win an Olympic victory in the four-horse chariot race, just as his half-brother Miltiades had done. In the next Olympics, Cimon won again with the same horses, but allowed Pisistratus to be proclaimed the winner, and by giving up the victory to him, he returned to his own property under a truce. Cimon won another Olympic victory with the same horses, but was later killed by the sons of Pisistratus, no longer with Pisistratus himself alive. They killed him by sending men into the Prytaneion at night. Cimon was buried in front of the city, beyond the road called "Through the Hollow," and opposite him, the horses that won the three Olympic victories were buried. Other horses had already done the same for Evagoras the Laconian, but none more than these. At that time, the elder of Cimon's sons, Stesagoras, was being raised by his paternal uncle Miltiades in the Chersonese, while the younger, also named Miltiades, was with Cimon himself in Athens, bearing the name of the founder of the Chersonese, Miltiades.
This Miltiades, then, having come from the Chersonese and having escaped a double death, was a general of the Athenians. For indeed, the Phoenicians who pursued him as far as Imbros were greatly concerned to capture him and bring him to the king. And having escaped these and arriving in his own land, thinking himself to be in safety already, his enemies received him there, bringing him under a court and accusing him of tyranny in the Chersonese. And having escaped these too, he was thus received as a general of the Athenians, having been chosen by the people.
And first, while still in the city, the generals sent to Sparta a herald, Pheidippides, an Athenian man indeed, but otherwise a day-runner and practicing this: to him indeed, as he himself said, Pheidippides, and reported to the Athenians, Pan met him around the Parthenion mountain that is above Tegea: and having called out the name of Pheidippides, Pan commanded him to report to the Athenians, for what reason they make no care of him, being well-disposed to the Athenians and having been useful to them in many ways already, and still to be in the future. And these things, the Athenians, when their affairs were already well established, believing them to be true, set up a sanctuary of Pan under the Acropolis, and from this report, they propitiate him with annual sacrifices and a torch race.
At that time, this Pheidippides was sent by the generals, and when he said that Pan had appeared to him, on the second day from the city of the Athenians, he was in Sparta. And coming to the rulers, he said, "O Lacedaemonians, the Athenians ask you to help them and not to allow the most ancient city among the Greeks to fall into slavery to barbarian men. For now, Eretria has been enslaved, and Greece has become weaker by the loss of an important city." He indeed reported to them the things commanded, and they were eager to help the Athenians, but it was impossible for them to do this immediately, not wanting to break the law. For it was the ninth day of the month, and they said they would not go out unless the circle was full.
These indeed waited for the full moon. To the barbarians, Hippias, the son of Pisistratus, led them to Marathon, having seen such a vision the night before: Hippias seemed to have lain with his own mother. Therefore, he concluded from the dream that, having gone down to Athens and having recovered his rule, he would end his life in his old age. Indeed, he concluded these things from the vision, but then, as he was leading them, he disembarked the slaves from Eretria onto the island of the Styrians, which is called Aegilia, and he anchored the ships at Marathon and arranged the barbarians who had gone onto the land. And as he was arranging these things, a sneeze and a cough came upon him more violently than he was accustomed to: and as he was an older man, most of his teeth were loose: therefore, one of his teeth was thrown out by the force of the cough. And when it had fallen out onto the sand, he made a great effort to find it. But when the tooth did not appear to him, he groaned and said to those standing by, "This land is not ours, and we will not be able to make it subject to us: the tooth shares as much part as was mine."
Hippias indeed believed that his vision had come true in this way. Meanwhile, the Athenians, having been arranged in the precinct of Heracles, the Plataeans came to help them with their entire population. For the Plataeans had given themselves to the Athenians, and the Athenians had already undertaken many labors on their behalf. They gave themselves in this way: oppressed by the Thebans, the Plataeans first offered themselves to Cleomenes, son of Anaxandrides, and the Lacedaemonians. But they, not accepting, said to them these things: "We indeed live far away, and such help would be cold for you: for you would often be enslaved before anyone of us heard. But we advise you to give yourselves to the Athenians, who are close neighbors and not bad at avenging." The Lacedaemonians advised this, not so much out of goodwill for the Plataeans as wanting the Athenians to have troubles standing with the Boeotians. The Lacedaemonians indeed advised the Plataeans these things, but they did not trust them, and as the Athenians were making sacrifices to the twelve gods, they sat as suppliants at the altar and gave themselves. The Thebans, having learned these things, marched against the Plataeans, and the Athenians helped them. As they were about to join battle, the Corinthians did not overlook them, but having happened upon them and having reconciled them with both sides consenting, they set the land on these terms, to let the Thebans not force those Boeotians who did not want to be Boeotians. The Corinthians indeed, having learned these things, departed, but the Boeotians attacked the Athenians as they were leaving, and having attacked, they were defeated in the battle. The Athenians, having crossed over the boundaries which the Corinthians had set for the Plataeans, made the Asopus river itself the boundary between the Thebans and the Plataeans and Hysiae. The Plataeans indeed gave themselves to the Athenians in the aforementioned way, and they came then to Marathon to help.
To the Athenian generals, opinions were divided: some were not willing to engage in battle (for they were too few to face the army of the Medes), while others, including Miltiades, urged them to fight. As their opinions were divided and the worse of the opinions prevailed, there was an eleventh man, chosen by lot to be the polemarch of the Athenians (for in the past, the Athenians made the polemarch equal in vote to the generals), and at that time, Callimachus of Aphidnae was the polemarch. Miltiades, having approached him, spoke these words: "In you now, Callimachus, lies the power to either enslave Athens or, having made it free, leave a memorial for all human life, such as not even Harmodius and Aristogeiton have left. For now, indeed, since the Athenians have come into the greatest danger, if they submit to the Medes, it is decided that they will suffer having been handed over to Hippias; but if this city prevails, it is likely to become the first of the Greek cities. How, then, these things are possible to happen, and how the power of these matters belongs to you, I will now come to explain. Of us ten generals, opinions are divided: some urge to fight, while others do not. If we do not engage now, I expect that some great faction, having fallen upon the Athenians' thoughts, will shake them so as to medize; but if we engage before anything weak among the Athenians comes to pass with others, we are able, with the gods distributing equally, to prevail in the engagement. All these things, then, now tend towards you and depend on you. For if you add yourself to my opinion, there will be for you a free country and a city first among those in Greece; but if you choose the opinion of those avoiding the engagement, you will have the opposite of the good things I have recounted."
Saying these things, Miltiades persuaded Callimachus; and with the polemarch's opinion added, the decision to engage was confirmed. Then, the generals whose opinion was to engage, as each of their days of leadership came, handed over to Miltiades; and he, receiving it, did not make an engagement, until indeed his own day of leadership came.
When it came to that one, then indeed the Athenians were arranging themselves in this way as if to engage in battle: the polemarch Callimachus was leading the right wing; for the law at that time held thus for the Athenians, that the polemarch should have the right wing. And with him leading, the tribes followed one another in order as they were numbered, and lastly, the Plataeans were arranged, holding the left wing. For from this battle, when the Athenians lead up sacrifices to the festivals that take place every four years, the Athenian herald prays together with the Athenians, saying that good things come to pass for both the Athenians and the Plataeans. Then, as the Athenians were arranging themselves at Marathon, something like this happened: the camp, being made equal to the Median camp, the middle of it became few in ranks, and in this place, the camp was weakest, but each wing was strong in multitude.
When they were arranged and the sacrifices turned out favorable, then indeed the Athenians set forth running towards the barbarians. The distance between them was no less than eight stadia. The Persians, seeing them coming at a run, prepared to receive them, thinking that the Athenians were utterly mad and doomed, seeing them few in number and rushing forward at a run, with neither cavalry nor archers. Now, these were the thoughts of the barbarians; but when the Athenians came together with the barbarians, they fought in a manner worthy of mention. For they were the first of all the Greeks we know of who charged the enemy at a run, and the first who endured the sight of Median clothing and the men wearing it. Until then, the very name of the Medes had been a terror to the Greeks to hear.
And indeed, in the battle at Marathon, a long time passed, and the barbarians were victorious in the middle of the camp, where the Persians themselves and the Sacae were arrayed: thus, the barbarians were indeed victorious in this part and, having broken through, they pursued towards the inland. However, on each wing, the Athenians and the Plataeans were victorious: and while they allowed the defeated barbarians to flee, they gathered both wings together against those who had broken through their center, and the Athenians were victorious. And as the Persians fled, they followed, striking them down, until they reached the sea, where they asked for fire and seized the ships.
And in this struggle indeed, the war-chief perishes, having become a brave man, and from the generals, Stesilaus, the son of Thrasylaus, dies: and in this, Cynegirus, the son of Euphorion, here, seizing the figureheads of the ships, having his hand cut off by an axe, falls; and in this, many other Athenians, both numerous and well-known.
Indeed, the Athenians managed to seize seven of the ships in such a manner: and with the remaining ships, the barbarians, having sailed back, and having taken up the slaves from Eretria from the island where they had left them, sailed around Sunium, wanting to arrive at the city before the Athenians. And the reason held among the Athenians that these things were devised by the Alcmaeonidae through their contrivance: for they were accused of having made an agreement with the Persians to raise a shield when they were already on their ships.
These indeed sailed around Sunium: and the Athenians, as they had the swiftest feet, came to the aid of the city, and arrived before the barbarians came, and having set up camp, they went from the Heracleum in Marathon to another Heracleum in Cynosarges. The barbarians, with their ships having been carried past Phalerum, for this was the harbor of the Athenians at that time, having anchored their ships beyond this, sailed back to Asia.
In this battle at Marathon, 6,400 of the barbarians died, and 192 Athenian men. So many on both sides fell. There, it is said that a strange event occurred: an Athenian man, Epizelus, son of Couphagoras, fighting in the battle and becoming a good man, was deprived of his sight, neither being struck on any part of his body nor hit, and for the rest of his life, from that time on, he was blind. I heard him say something about his suffering: he seemed to see a tall, armed man, whose beard covered his entire shield; this apparition passed by him, but killed his comrade standing next to him. This is what I learned Epizelus said.
Datis, while traveling with his army to Asia, when he arrived at Myconos, saw a vision in his sleep. And what the vision was, it is not said; but he, as soon as day broke, made a search of the ships, and finding in a Phoenician ship a gilded statue of Apollo, he inquired from where it had been plundered, and learning from which temple it was, he sailed with his own ship to Delos: and he arrived there, for at that time the Delians had returned to the island, and he placed the statue in the temple and commanded the Delians to carry the statue to Delium of the Thebans: and this is opposite Chalcis on the sea. Having given these orders, Datis sailed away, but this statue the Delians did not carry away, but after twenty years the Thebans themselves brought it to Delium, following the instructions of an oracle.
The enslaved Eretrians, Datis and Artaphrenes, as they sailed to Asia, brought them up to Susa. King Darius, indeed, before the Eretrians became captives, held great anger against them, as the Eretrians began the injustice first; but then, when he saw them brought to himself and being under his control, he did no other harm, but settled them in the land of Cissia in his own station, which is called Ardericca, being 210 stadia away from Susa and 40 from the well that provides a threefold nature: for indeed, asphalt, salt, and oil are drawn from it in this manner: it is drawn by a windlass, and a half-skin is attached instead of a bucket; and having dipped this, one draws and then pours it into a receptacle: and from this, it is turned into other ways, becoming threefold. And indeed, the asphalt and the salts solidify immediately: but the oil, which the Persians call "rhadinace," is black and provides a heavy smell. In this place, King Darius settled the Eretrians, who even until my time held this land, preserving the ancient language. Thus, indeed, it happened concerning the Eretrians in this way.
Of the Lacedaemonians, 2,000 arrived in Athens after the full moon, having great haste to seize, so that on the third day from Sparta they were in Attica. But arriving later than the engagement, they still desired to behold the Medes: and having gone to Marathon, they beheld them. After that, praising the Athenians and their deed, they departed back.
But I marvel at and do not accept the account that the Alcmeonidae ever raised a shield as a signal to the Persians, desiring the Athenians to be under the power of both the barbarians and Hippias. These men seem to have been haters of tyrants more than, or at least as much as, Callias, son of Phaenippus and father of Hipponicus. For Callias alone of all the Athenians dared, in order that Pisistratus might be expelled from the Athenians, to buy his property when it was proclaimed for sale by the public, and he contrived all other things most hostile against him.
But of Callias, it is worthy to mention him in many ways for having something remarkable. For on the one hand, the aforementioned, as a man who utterly freed his country; and on the other hand, he did this in Olympia: having won with a horse, and having become second with a four-horse chariot, and having previously taken the Pythian prize, he became known to all the Greeks with the greatest expenses. And he became such a man in regard to his own daughters, who were three: for when they became of marriageable age, he gave them the most magnificent gift and granted them this favor: that from all the Athenians, each daughter could choose for herself the man she desired, and he gave this man to her.
And the Alcmeonidae likewise were no less haters of tyrants than this man. So, it is a wonder to me and I do not accept the slander that they would take up a shield, those who always fled from the tyrants, and by their contrivance the sons of Pisistratus left the tyranny, and thus these men were the ones who freed Athens much more than Harmodius and Aristogeiton, as I judge. For indeed, having killed Hipparchus, they only made wild the remaining sons of Pisistratus, and did not stop the others from being tyrants any more; but the Alcmeonidae clearly freed the city, if indeed they were truly the ones who persuaded the Pythian priestess to signify to the Lacedaemonians to free Athens, as it has been made clear to me earlier.
But indeed, perhaps they were betraying their country due to some grudge against the people of Athens. Therefore, there were no other men among the Athenians who were more esteemed or honored than them. Thus, it does not make sense for them to take up a shield for such a reason. For indeed, a shield was taken up, and this cannot be said otherwise: it happened. However, who it was that took it up, I do not have the means to say further than this.
The Alcmeonidae indeed were from of old illustrious in Athens, and from Alcmeon and again Megacles they became very illustrious. For this Alcmeon, the son of Megacles, was a helper and took part willingly with the Lydians who came from Sardis to the oracle in Delphi from Croesus; and Croesus, having learned from the Lydians who went to the oracles that he was doing him a service, sent for him to come to Sardis, and when he had come, he made him a gift of as much gold as he could carry away at one time on his own body. And Alcmeon, having regard to the gift being such as it was, contrived and brought it to pass as follows:having put on a large tunic and left a deep fold in it, and having put on the widest boots that he could find, he went into the treasury to which they led him; and falling upon a heap of gold-dust, first he packed by the side of his legs as much gold as the boots would contain, and then he filled all the fold of the tunic with gold and strewed the dust among the hair of his head, and took more of it and filled his mouth, and then came out of the treasury, having scarcely strength to drag his boots, and in all his appearance rather resembling anything than a man, for his mouth was stuffed full and all his body was swollen out. And Croesus, when he saw him, burst out laughing, and gave him not only that gold which he had taken, but also other gold equal in amount to that. Thus this house became greatly wealthy, and this Alcmeon, having become an owner of four-horse chariots, was the winner of a victory at Olympia.
In the second generation after, Cleisthenes, the tyrant of Sicyon, raised the family to even greater prominence, making it much more famous among the Greeks than it had been before. For Cleisthenes, the son of Aristonymus, the son of Myron, the son of Andreas, had a daughter whose name was Agariste. He desired to find the best of all the Greeks and give her to him as a wife. So, when the Olympic Games were being held and Cleisthenes had won a victory in the four-horse chariot race, he made a proclamation that any Greek who thought himself worthy to be Cleisthenes' son-in-law should come to Sicyon within sixty days or earlier, as Cleisthenes would arrange the marriage within a year, starting from the sixtieth day. At this point, as many Greeks as were distinguished in their own estimation and by their lineage came as suitors. For these, Cleisthenes prepared both a race and a wrestling contest, and held them at that very place.
From Italy indeed came Smindyrides, the son of Hippocrates, a Sybarite, who arrived as a man of utmost luxury (and Sybaris was at its peak during this time), and Damasus, a Sirite, the son of Amyris, who was called wise. These men came from Italy, and from the Ionian Gulf came Amphimnestus, the son of Epistrophus, an Epidamnian; this man came from the Ionian Gulf. From Aetolia came Males, the brother of Titormus, who surpassed the Greeks in strength and drove men to the farthest parts of the Aetolian land; this was Titormus' brother. From the Peloponnese came Leocedes, the son of Phidon, the tyrant of the Argives, Phidon who established measures for the Peloponnesians and committed the greatest outrage of all the Greeks, who, having driven out the Elean umpires, himself presided over the contest at Olympia; this man's son, and Amiantus, the son of Lycurgus, an Arcadian from Trapezus, and Laphanes, the son of Euphorion, an Azen from the city of Paeus, who, as the story goes in Arcadia, received the Dioscuri in his house and from that time entertained all men, and Onomastus, the son of Agaeus, an Elean. These men indeed came from the Peloponnese itself, and from Athens arrived Megacles, the son of Alcmeon, who had visited Croesus, and another Hippocleides, the son of Tisandrus, who excelled the Athenians in wealth and appearance. From Eretria, which was flourishing at this time, came Lysanias; this man alone came from Euboea. From Thessaly came Diactorides, a Crannonian of the Scopadae, and from the Molossians, Alcon.
These indeed were the suitors. When they arrived on the aforementioned day, Cleisthenes first inquired about their homelands and the lineage of each, and then, keeping them for a year, he tested them in manly virtue and temper, and in education and manner, going to each one in conversation and to all together, and leading out those who were younger of them to gymnastic exercises, and most of all, he tested them in the shared meals; for as long as he kept them, he did all this and entertained them magnificently. And indeed, especially the suitors who had come from Athens were pleasing, and of these, more so Hippocleides, son of Tisandrus, who was judged for his manly virtue and because he was related from afar to the Cypselids in Corinth.
But when the appointed day of the marriage feast and the decision of Cleisthenes to choose from among them all came, Cleisthenes sacrificed a hundred oxen and entertained both the suitors and all the people of Sicyon. And when they had finished dinner, the suitors had a contest about music and the stories told in the middle. And as the drinking went on, Hippocleides, far surpassing the others, ordered the flute-player to play a dance tune, and when the flute-player obeyed, he began to dance. And while he himself was pleased with his dancing, Cleisthenes, seeing the whole matter, was suspicious. But after a while, Hippocleides ordered someone to bring in a table, and when the table came in, he first danced on it in Laconian fashion, then other Attic styles, and thirdly, resting his head on the table, he waved his legs in the air. And Cleisthenes, at first and second dancing, held himself back, disliking to have Hippocleides as his son-in-law because of the dancing and the shamelessness, not wanting to cry out against him; but when he saw him waving his legs, no longer able to hold back, he said, "O son of Tisandrus, you have danced away your marriage." And Hippocleides, taking it up, said, "It does not matter to Hippocleides." From this, indeed, this is named.
Cleisthenes, having made silence, spoke these words in the midst: "Men, suitors of my daughter, I both praise all of you and to all of you, if it were possible, I would grant, neither choosing one of you as exceptional nor rejecting the rest. But it is not possible for one deliberating about a single maiden to do according to the desire of all. To those of you being sent away from this marriage, I give a talent of silver to each as a gift on account of the worthiness for the sake of marrying from me and for the sake of the journey from home. And to Megacles, son of Alcmeon, I promise my daughter Agariste according to the laws of the Athenians." And when he said he would promise, the marriage was confirmed for Cleisthenes by Megacles.
Concerning the judgment of the suitors, so much happened and thus the Alcmeonidae were celebrated throughout Greece. And from their marriage, Cleisthenes was born, the one who established the tribes and democracy for the Athenians, having the name from his maternal grandfather of Sicyon. And indeed, Megacles and Hippocrates were born, and from Hippocrates, another Megacles and another Agariste, having the name from Cleisthenes' Agariste. She, having married Xanthippus, the son of Ariphron, and being pregnant, saw a vision in her sleep, and it seemed she gave birth to a lion, and after a few days, she bore Pericles to Xanthippus.
After the wound inflicted at Marathon, Miltiades, who had already been held in high esteem among the Athenians, grew even more in prominence. Requesting from the Athenians seventy ships, as well as an army and money, he did not disclose to them the country against which he would campaign, but said that they would become rich if they followed him; for he would lead them to such a land from which they would easily carry off an abundance of gold. Saying such things, he asked for the ships. The Athenians, being persuaded by these words, granted them.
And Miltiades, having taken the army, sailed to Paros, having as a pretext that the Parians had previously supported the Persians with triremes at Marathon. This indeed was a pretext for words, but he also had a certain grudge against the Parians because of Lysagoras, the son of Tisias, who was of Parian origin, having slandered him to the Persian Hydarnes. And arriving at the place he sailed to, Miltiades besieged the Parians, who were shut up within their walls, and sending a herald, he demanded a hundred talents, saying that if they did not give it to him, he would not withdraw his army until he had taken them. But the Parians did not even consider giving Miltiades any money, and they were devising how to defend their city, both by observing other things and especially by raising the most vulnerable part of the wall each night to double its original height.
All the Greeks indeed agree on this much of the story, but the Parians themselves say that what happened next was as follows. Miltiades, being at a loss, came into conversation with a captive woman, who was a Parian by birth, and her name was Timo, and she was an under-priestess of the chthonic gods. This woman, coming into the presence of Miltiades, advised that if he cared greatly to capture Paros, he should do whatever she herself might suggest. And after she had made her suggestion, Miltiades went to the hill that was before the city, where there was a fence of Demeter the Lawgiver, and he jumped over it, being unable to open the doors, and having jumped over, he went to the shrine, intending to do whatever he would do inside, whether he would move something of the immovable things or do something else. And he came to the doors, and a panic came upon him, and he went back the same way, and as he was jumping down from the wall, his thigh was dislocated; but others say that it was his knee that he injured.
Now Miltiades, indeed, was in a sorry state as he sailed back, neither bringing money to the Athenians nor having gained possession of Paros, but having besieged it for twenty-six days and having laid waste to the island. The Parians, learning that Timo, the under-priestess of the gods, had guided Miltiades, wanted to take revenge on her for these things, and they sent diviners to Delphi, as they had been granted respite from the siege. They sent them to inquire whether they should punish the under-priestess of the gods who had revealed to the enemies the capture of their homeland and the unspeakable sacred rites concerning the male offspring to Miltiades. But the Pythian priestess did not allow it, saying that Timo was not the cause of these things, but that Miltiades must meet his end not well, having been revealed as the leader of the evils.
The Pythia indeed responded thus to the Parians: but the Athenians, having Miltiades returned from Paros, held him in their mouths, both the others and especially Xanthippus, the son of Ariphron, who, having brought Miltiades to the people, prosecuted him for the death penalty on account of the deception of the Athenians. Miltiades himself, being present, did not defend himself: for he was unable, as his thigh was festering: but lying on a bed, his friends defended him, having mentioned much of the battle that had taken place at Marathon and the capture of Lemnos, how, having taken Lemnos and avenged the Pelasgians, he had delivered it to the Athenians. The people, having come together, acquitted him of the death penalty, but having fined him for the injustice with fifty talents, Miltiades, after these things, died, as his thigh had become gangrenous and putrefied, and his son Cimon paid the fifty talents.
Miltiades, the son of Cimon, acquired Lemnos in this way: The Pelasgians, after they were expelled from Attica by the Athenians, whether justly or unjustly - for I cannot determine this, except for what is said, that Hecataeus, the son of Hegesandrus, claimed in his writings that it was unjustly: for when the Athenians saw the land, which was theirs under Mount Hymettus, given to the Pelasgians to dwell in as payment for the wall that had once been built around the acropolis, they saw that it was well cultivated, whereas before it had been bad and worth nothing, and they took envy and desire for the land, and so they drove them out, with the Athenians putting forward no other pretext. But as the Athenians themselves say, they expelled them justly. For when the Pelasgians were dwelling under Mount Hymettus, they began to commit these injustices: for they always went to their daughters and sons for water at the Nine Wells, for at that time they did not have slaves, nor did the other Greeks: and when these girls came, the Pelasgians, out of insolence and contempt, violated them. And yet they did not stop doing this to them, but finally they were caught planning an attack in the act. And they themselves became so much better men than them, that, although they could have killed the Pelasgians when they caught them plotting, they did not want to, but instead told them to leave the land. And so they left and settled in other places, and indeed in Lemnos. Hecataeus said these things, but the Athenians say this.
These Pelasgians, then, who at that time inhabited Lemnos and desired to take vengeance on the Athenians, well knowing the times of the Athenian festivals, having obtained fifty-oared ships, lay in wait for the women of the Athenians when they were celebrating a festival to Artemis in Brauron, and having carried off many of them, they sailed away and brought them to Lemnos, and kept them as concubines. And when these women became pregnant and had children, they taught their children the Attic language and Athenian customs. And these children were unwilling to mix with the children of the Pelasgian women, and if any one of them was struck by any of these, they all came to the rescue and helped one another, and they claimed to rule over the others and were much stronger. And when the Pelasgians perceived this, they took counsel among themselves, and it seemed to them a terrible thing if indeed the boys should attempt to rule over them as soon as they began to help one another against the sons of the lawful wives, and what then would they do when they grew up to be men? So they decided to kill the sons of the Attic women. And they did this, and they destroyed their mothers as well. And from this deed and the former one, that which the women did when they killed their husbands who were companions of Thoas, it has become customary in Greece to call all cruel deeds "Lemnian."
And so, having killed their own children and wives, the Pelasgians found that neither the land bore fruit, nor did the women and flocks give birth as before. Pressed by famine and childlessness, they sent to Delphi, seeking some relief from their present troubles. The Pythia commanded them to give the Athenians the penalties which the Athenians themselves would judge. So the Pelasgians came to Athens and offered to give penalties for all their wrongdoing. The Athenians, having spread a couch in the town hall as beautifully as possible and having set a table full of all good things, ordered the Pelasgians to hand over their land in such a condition. The Pelasgians, understanding this, said, "When a ship with a north wind can sail from your land to ours in one day, then we will hand it over," knowing that this was impossible to happen. For Attica lies much to the south of Lemnos.
At that time, indeed such things happened; but many years later, when the Chersonese on the Hellespont became subject to the Athenians, Miltiades, the son of Cimon, having sailed with a ship, taking advantage of the Etesian winds, from Elaeus in the Chersonese to Lemnos, he demanded the Pelasgians to leave the island, reminding them of the oracle which the Pelasgians never hoped would be fulfilled for them. Now, the Hephaestians obeyed, but the Myrinaeans, not agreeing that the Chersonese was Attic, were besieged, until they too submitted. Thus, the Athenians and Miltiades took possession of Lemnos.