But when the message arrived about the battle that took place in Marathon to King Darius, the son of Hystaspes, and before he was greatly angered with the Athenians for the attack on Sardis, and indeed then he did much more terrible things and was more eager to wage war against Greece. And immediately he announced, sending messengers to the cities, to prepare an army, commanding each to provide much more than before, and ships and horses and grain and transport vessels. And while these things were being announced, Asia was shaken for three years, as the best were being chosen to wage war against Greece and were being prepared. But in the fourth year, the Egyptians, having been enslaved by Cambyses, revolted from the Persians. At this point, indeed, he was even more eager to wage war against both.
But as Darius was preparing for Egypt and Athens, a great dispute arose among his sons concerning the leadership, as it was necessary for him to appoint a king according to the law of the Persians and then wage war. For there were three sons born to Darius before he became king, from his former wife, the daughter of Gobryas, and four others after he became king, from Atossa, the daughter of Cyrus. Of the former, Artobazanes was the eldest, and of the latter, Xerxes. Being of different mothers, they were in conflict, Artobazanes claiming that he should be the ruler because he was the eldest of all the offspring and that it was customary among all people for the eldest to hold the rule, while Xerxes claimed that he was the son of Atossa, the daughter of Cyrus, and that Cyrus was the one who had acquired freedom for the Persians.
While Darius was not yet making a decision, Demaratus, the son of Ariston, happened to be in Susa, having been deprived of his kingship in Sparta and having imposed exile upon himself from Lacedaemon. This man, learning of the dispute among Darius' sons, came, as the story goes, and advised Xerxes to say in addition to the words he spoke, that he himself was born to Darius already reigning as king and holding the power of the Persians, while Artobazanes was born to Darius still a private citizen: therefore, it would not be just or proper for anyone else to hold the honor before him. For Demaratus said that in Sparta, it was customary for the son born after the father became king to succeed to the kingship. When Xerxes used Demaratus' suggestion, Darius, realizing that he spoke justly, accepted him as king. However, it seems to me that even without this suggestion, Xerxes would have become king, for Atossa held all the power.
Having appointed Xerxes as king, Darius then set out to wage war. But after these events and the revolt of Egypt in the following year, as he was preparing, Darius died, having reigned for a total of thirty-six years, and he was not able to take vengeance on either the rebellious Egyptians or the Athenians.
After the death of Darius, the kingship passed to his son Xerxes. Now Xerxes, at first, was not at all eager to wage war against Greece, but he was preparing to gather an army against Egypt. Mardonius, the son of Gobryas, who was the cousin of Xerxes and the son of Darius' sister, held great power and influence with him, and he spoke thus: "Master, it is not right that the Athenians, who have done much harm to the Persians, should not pay the penalty for what they have done. But if you now attend to these matters at hand, and after subduing rebellious Egypt, lead an army against Athens, you will have a good reputation among men, and someone later will be cautious about waging war against your land." This was his argument for revenge, and he added this encouragement, that Europe was a very beautiful land, and it bore all kinds of cultivated trees, and it was of the highest excellence, worthy for a king alone among mortals to possess.
Mardonius, desiring new exploits and wishing to become the governor of Greece himself, spoke these things. In time, he both accomplished and persuaded Xerxes to do these things, for other allies also joined him in persuading Xerxes. From Thessaly, messengers of the Aleuadae, who were kings of Thessaly, came forth, calling upon the king and offering their utmost eagerness for the invasion of Greece. And the Pisistratidae, who had gone up to Susa, held the same opinions as the Aleuadae, and they added something even more to these matters. Having with them Onomacritus, an Athenian man, a composer of oracles and an interpreter of the oracles of Musaeus, they had gone up, having previously reconciled their enmity. For Onomacritus had been driven out of Athens by Hipparchus, the son of Pisistratus, when he was caught by Lasus of Hermione in the act of inserting an oracle into the oracles of Musaeus, saying that the islands lying off Lemnos would disappear beneath the sea. Therefore, Hipparchus drove him out, although he had previously made the most use of him. But then, having gone up together, they somehow came into the sight of the king, and as the Pisistratidae spoke solemn words about him, he recited the oracles. If there was anything in them that bore a mistake for the barbarian, he said nothing of it, but choosing the most fortunate ones, he spoke of how it was necessary for the Hellespont to be bridled by a Persian man, and he explained the driving away. Thus, he contributed by prophesying, and both the Pisistratidae and the Aleuadae, demonstrating their opinions.
But when Xerxes had resolved to make war upon Greece, then in the second year after the death of Darius, he first made an expedition against those who had revolted. Having subdued these, and having made all Egypt much more enslaved than it was in the time of Darius, he entrusted it to Achaemenes, his own brother and the son of Darius. Now Achaemenes, being appointed governor of Egypt, was afterwards slain by Inaros, the son of Psammetichus, a Libyan man.
After the capture of Egypt, Xerxes, intending to bring the army against Athens, summoned a council of the best Persians to learn their opinions and to announce his own intentions. When they had assembled, Xerxes spoke as follows: "Men of Persia, I will not establish this custom among you by being the first to introduce it, but will follow it and use it. For as I learn from the elders, we have never yet remained at peace since we received this empire from the Medes, when Cyrus overthrew Astyages. But it is the will of the gods that this should be so, and it is more advantageous for us. Now Cyrus and Cambyses and my father Darius have accomplished and acquired many nations, which no one could find fault with. But since I received this throne, I have been considering how I may not fall short of my predecessors in honor, nor add less power to the Persians. And considering this, I find that by doing both, we will gain honor and revenge and retribution. Therefore, I have now called you together, that I may communicate to you what I intend to do." "I plan to yoke the Hellespont and lead an army through Europe against Greece, in order to punish the Athenians for what they have done to the Persians and to my father. You saw my father preparing to march against these men. But he is dead, and it was not granted to him to take vengeance. I, however, on his behalf and on behalf of all the Persians, will not rest until I have taken and burned Athens, which has done us unprovoked wrong. First, they came to Sardis with Aristagoras the Milesian, who was our slave, and they burned the groves and the temples. Secondly, they treated us in the same way when we landed in their country, as Datis and Artaphrenes were leading our army, which you all know. For these reasons, I have resolved to march against them, and I find many good things in doing so. If we subdue these people and their neighbors, who inhabit the land of Pelops the Phrygian, we will make the Persian territory coextensive with the sky, and no land will be seen by the sun that borders on ours. For I will pass through all of Europe and make all its people subject to you. For I understand that there is no city or nation of men left that will be able to come to battle with us, once we have removed those whom I have mentioned. Thus, both those who are guilty and those who are not will bear the yoke of slavery." "You, then, will please me by doing the following: When I announce the time for you to come, each one of you must appear promptly, well prepared. And whoever comes with the best-equipped army, I will give him the gifts that are considered the most valuable among us. These things must be done in this way. But so that you do not think I am making decisions on my own, I put the matter before you, and I command any of you who wishes to speak his mind." Having said this, he stopped.
After Xerxes spoke, Mardonius said, "O Master, not only are you the best of all Persians who have ever lived, but also of those who will come, speaking both the most excellent and truest things, and you will not let the Ionians who dwell in Europe mock us, being unworthy. For it would indeed be a terrible thing if, having conquered and enslaved Scythians, Indians, Ethiopians, and Assyrians, and many other great and numerous nations who did no wrong to the Persians but sought to increase their power, we do not take revenge on the Greeks who have committed injustice." "What do we fear? A gathering of a multitude? Or the power of wealth? We know their manner of fighting, and we know their power is weak. We have conquered their children, those who are called Ionians, Aeolians, and Dorians, dwelling in our land. And I myself have already tried, having been ordered by your father to march against these men, and having advanced as far as Macedonia and only a little short of reaching Athens itself, no one opposed me in battle." "Indeed, the Greeks, as I learn, are accustomed to setting up wars most foolishly, due to both ignorance and simplicity. For when they declare war on each other, finding the most beautiful and level ground, they go down to it and fight, so that the winners depart with great harm, and I do not even mention the beginning of the losers: for they are utterly destroyed. It was necessary for them, being of the same language, to resolve their differences through a herald and messengers, and by any means rather than battles. But if they absolutely had to wage war against each other, they should have found out where each side is most difficult to attack and tried there. Thus, the Greeks, dealing with each other in an unprofitable manner, when I advanced as far as the land of Macedonia, did not come to the point of fighting." "But who, O king, will dare to oppose you, bringing forth war, leading both the multitude from Asia and all the ships? As I think, the affairs of the Greeks do not belong to such boldness. But if, indeed, I were deceived in my opinion, and they, being lifted up by folly, would come to us in battle, they would learn that we are the best of men in war. Let it be, then, that nothing is untried: for nothing is automatic, but everything loves to come about from experience for humans."
Mardonius had said so much, praising Xerxes' opinion, and the other Persians remained silent, not daring to express a contrary view. Then Artabanus, the son of Hystaspes and Xerxes' uncle, who was also a trusted advisor, spoke these words: "O King, when opposing opinions are not expressed, it is not possible to choose the better one, but one must use the one that has been expressed. However, when they are expressed, just as we can discern the purer gold when we compare it to other gold, we can discern the better opinion. I myself advised your father, my brother Darius, not to wage war against the Scythians, a people who had no fixed city. But he, hoping to subdue the nomadic Scythians, did not listen to me, and after losing many good men from his army, he returned. Now, O King, you are about to wage war against men far better than the Scythians, who are said to be the best warriors both on land and at sea. There is something terrible in this, which it is right for me to tell you. You say that by bridging the Hellespont, you will lead an army through Europe to Greece. And indeed, you have calculated that either by land or by sea, or both, you will be defeated, for these men are said to be valiant, and it is possible to calculate that when such a large army as that which accompanied Datis and Artaphernes came to the land of Attica, the Athenians alone destroyed it. So, it did not succeed in both ways. But if they put their ships in the water and, having won a naval battle, sail to the Hellespont and then break the bridge, this, O King, becomes a terrible thing." "I do not devise these things with any special wisdom of my own, but as one who narrowly escaped experiencing a disaster, when your father, having bridged the Thracian Bosporus, and having bridged the river Ister, crossed over against the Scythians. At that time, the Scythians, in various ways, begged the Ionians to break the passage, to whom the guard of the bridges of the Ister had been entrusted. And then, if Histiaeus, the tyrant of Miletus, had followed the opinion of the other tyrants and had not opposed it, the affairs of the Persians would have been ruined. And yet, it is terrible even to hear in words that all the king's affairs depended on one man. Therefore, do not desire to come into such danger when there is no necessity, but listen to me. Now, dissolve this assembly, and when you think it is time, having considered by yourself, announce what seems best to you. For I find that to deliberate well is the greatest gain: for if something wishes to oppose it, the plan has been well devised, but it is defeated by fortune; but he who has planned badly, if fortune helps him, has found a discovery, but he has not planned any worse." "You see how the god strikes with his thunderbolts the animals that stand out, and does not allow them to show off, but the small ones do not bother him at all; you also see how he always throws his arrows at the largest houses and trees: for the god loves to cut down everything that stands out. So too, a large army is destroyed by a small one in this way: when the god, being jealous, throws fear or thunder into them, through which they are destroyed unworthily of themselves. For the god does not allow anyone else to think highly of himself except himself." "But if it is absolutely necessary to wage war against these men, dissolve this assembly, and when you think it is time, having considered by yourself, announce what seems best to you. For I find that to deliberate well is the greatest gain: for if something wishes to oppose it, the plan has been well devised, but it is defeated by fortune; but he who has planned badly, if fortune helps him, has found a discovery, but he has not planned any worse." "You, O King, I advise this: but you, O son of Gobryas, Mardonius, I tell you to stop speaking vain words about the Greeks, who are not worth listening to lightly. For by slandering the Greeks, you raise the king himself to wage war: and for this very reason, you seem to me to stretch out all eagerness. Do not let it be so. For slander is a most terrible thing: in it, there are two who do wrong, and one who is wronged. For the slanderer does wrong by accusing the absent, and the one who is wronged is persuaded before he learns the truth accurately: and the one who is absent from this conversation is wronged, being slandered by the one and considered evil by the other." "But if it is absolutely necessary to wage war against these men, come, let the king himself stay in the customs of the Persians, and let our children be compared on both sides, and let you yourself lead the army, choosing the men you want and taking whatever army you want. And if the king's affairs go as you say, let my children be killed, and in addition to them, let me also be killed: but if they go as I predict, let your children suffer this, and let you also suffer it, if you return. But if you do not want to undertake this, and you will lead the army to Greece at all costs, I say that someone will hear of Mardonius, the son of Gobryas, having done some great evil to the Persians, being torn apart by dogs and birds, either in the land of the Athenians or in that of the Lacedaemonians, if not even earlier on the road, knowing what kind of men you are urging the king to wage war against."
Artabanus finished speaking, and Xerxes, angered, replied with these words: "Artabanus, you are my father's brother, and this alone will save you from receiving a fitting punishment for your foolish words. Moreover, I will add this disgrace to you, being a coward and disheartened, that you will not join me in the campaign against Greece, but will stay here with the women. I, however, will accomplish all that I have said, even without your help. For I would not be born from Darius, the son of Hystaspes, the son of Arsames, the son of Ariaramnes, the son of Teispes, the son of Cyrus, the son of Cambyses, the son of Teispes, the son of Achaemenes, if I do not take revenge on the Athenians, knowing well that if we remain at peace, they will not, but will even wage war against our land, if we are to judge by what they have already done, who burned Sardis and drove into Asia. Therefore, it is not possible for either side to retreat, but to do or suffer is the contest set before us, so that either all these things will be under the Greeks, or all those things will be under the Persians; for there is nothing in the middle of the enmity. It is now a beautiful thing for us, having already suffered, to take revenge, so that I may also learn this terrible thing that I will suffer, having marched against these men, whom even Pelops the Phrygian, being a slave of my ancestors, so completely overcame that both the people themselves and their land are called by the name of the one who overcame them."
Thus, the conversation went so far. But after that, both joy and Artabanus' opinion troubled Xerxes. At night, as he was deliberating, he found that it was not a matter to wage war against Greece. And when he had decided this again, he fell asleep, and indeed, during the night, he saw a vision like this, as the Persians say: Xerxes thought that a tall and handsome man stood by him and said, "So, Persian, do you now plan not to lead an army against Greece, having previously said that you would gather the Persians for war? Neither, then, do you do well by changing your mind, nor will the one who will forgive you be present. But do as you planned during the day, and go on this path."
The one who spoke these things seemed to vanish, and when the day shone, Xerxes made no account of this dream. However, he gathered the Persians whom he had previously assembled and spoke these words to them: "Men of Persia, have forgiveness for me as I am of a wavering mind. For I have not yet reached the peak of my own wisdom, and those who urge me to do those things give me no time to rest. Yet, when I heard the opinion of Artabanus, my youth immediately surged, so that I cast away words more disgraceful towards an older man than was necessary. But now, I will make use of his opinion with understanding. Therefore, since I have changed my mind not to wage war against Greece, be at peace."
When the Persians heard these things, they were delighted and paid homage. But when night came, the same dream appeared again to Xerxes as he slept and said, "O son of Darius, indeed you seem to have renounced the expedition among the Persians and made my words of no account, as if you heard them from no one. Now, know this well: if you do not immediately set out on the campaign, this will happen to you: just as you became great and powerful in a short time, so too will you quickly become lowly and weak."
Xerxes, becoming greatly frightened by the vision, quickly ran out of his bed and sent a messenger to call Artabanus. When Artabanus arrived, Xerxes said these things to him: "Artabanus, I did not think wisely when I spoke vain words to you because of your good advice. However, after not much time, I changed my mind and realized that I must do the things you advised. Yet, I am not able to do these things even though I want to. For when I changed my mind and decided, the dream appears to me, not at all approving of me doing these things. Now, it even threatens and leaves. Therefore, if the god who sends this vision truly wants the expedition against Greece to happen, the same dream will come to you, giving the same command as it did to me. I think these things will happen in this way: if you take all my attire, wear it, and then sit on my throne, and after that, sleep in my bed."
Xerxes spoke these things, but Artabanus, not being persuaded by the first command, as he did not think it was right for him to sit on the royal throne, finally, as he was compelled, did the commanded thing, saying: "O king, it is equally decided by me to think well and to be willing to be persuaded by the one speaking good things: both of these things, surrounding you, throw you off due to the company of bad men, just as they say winds falling upon the sea, which is the most useful of all things to men, do not allow it to use its own nature. But for me, having heard your harsh words, it did not sting me with grief as much as the fact that, with two opinions lying before the Persians, one increasing arrogance and the other stopping it and saying that it is bad to teach the soul to always seek to have more than what is present, with such opinions lying before them, you chose the more dangerous one for yourself and the Persians. Now then, since you have changed your mind for the better, you say that a dream, sent by some god, visits you, not allowing you to dissolve the expedition against the Greeks. But these things are not divine, my son. For dreams that wander among men are such as I will teach you, being many years older than you: these visions of dreams wander most when one thinks during the day. We, however, had this expedition and the matter very much in hand during the day before." "But if this is not such as I divide it, but rather partakes of something divine, you have said everything yourself: for let it appear to me also, just as it does to you, giving the same command. And it ought to appear to me no more when I have the clothing than when I do not, and no more when I am resting in your bed than when I am not, if indeed it wishes to appear in some other way. For this thing, whatever it is, that appears to you in your sleep, does not belong to such foolishness as to think, when it sees me, that I am you, judging by your clothing. And if it will not make me worthy in any way and will not deem it right to appear, nor will it visit me, whether I have my clothing or yours, this will already need to be learned. For if indeed it visits you continuously, I would say that it is divine myself. But if it seems to you that it must be done this way and you are not able to change it, but I must already sleep in your bed, then let it appear to me also, with these things having been accomplished by me. But until this point, I will use the present opinion."
Having spoken so much, Artabanus, hoping that Xerxes would accept nothing he said, did as he was commanded. Putting on the clothing of Xerxes and sitting on the royal throne, as he was about to go to bed, the same dream that had come to Xerxes came to him as he slept. Standing over Artabanus, it said: "So, are you the one who tries to dissuade Xerxes from marching against Greece, as if you care for him? But you will not escape punishment, neither now nor later, for trying to prevent what must happen. As for Xerxes, he has been informed of what he must suffer if he disobeys."
Artabanus thought that the dream threatened these things and was about to burn his eyes with hot irons. And he, having cried out loudly, started up, and sitting beside Xerxes, as he went through the appearance of the dream, he spoke to him a second time these things: "I, O king, being a man who has already seen many and great things fall by the lesser, not allowing you to yield to everything in your youth, knowing that it would be bad to desire many things, remembering the expedition of Cyrus against the Massagetae and how it fared, and remembering also the one of Cambyses against the Ethiopians, and having campaigned with Darius against the Scythians. Knowing these things, I held the opinion that you should be undisturbed and be considered fortunate among all men. But since some divine impulse occurs, and as it seems, some destruction sent by the gods overtakes the Greeks, I myself am turned and change my opinion, and you, signify to the Persians the things sent from the god, and command them to use the first things spoken by you for the preparation, and do so in such a way that, with the god handing over, nothing of your own will be lacking." And after these things were spoken, they were both lifted up by the appearance, and as soon as it became day, Xerxes was putting these things forward to the Persians, and Artabanus, who previously seemed to be the only one holding back, then was clearly seen to be urging on.
As Xerxes was determined to set out on the expedition, a third vision appeared to him in his sleep. The Magi, having heard it, judged that it signified his rule over the entire earth and that all men would be enslaved to him. The vision was as follows: Xerxes seemed to be crowned with an olive branch, and from the olive tree, its branches covered the whole earth, but then the crown vanished from his head as it lay there. When the Magi interpreted this, all the Persians who had been gathered immediately sent word to their own provinces, filled with eagerness for the tasks set before them, each one desiring to receive the promised gifts. And so Xerxes began to muster his army, searching every part of the continent.
For from Egypt, having been conquered, for indeed four full years he prepared both the army and the supplies for the army, and in the fifth year, having set out, he campaigned with a great multitude of forces. For of the expeditions which we know, by far the greatest this one became, so that neither the one of Darius against the Scythians by this one appears to be anything, nor the Scythian one, when the Scythians, pursuing the Cimmerians, having invaded the Median land, having nearly destroyed all the upper parts of Asia, they inhabited, on account of which later Darius took vengeance, nor according to the stories the one of the sons of Atreus against Ilium, nor the one of the Mysians and Teucrians which happened before the Trojan ones, who, having crossed into Europe through the Bosporus, they destroyed all the Thracians and they went down to the Ionian Sea, and they drove as far as the river Peneus towards the south.
All these combined, even if other expeditions were added to them, are not worthy of this single one. For what nation in Asia did Xerxes not bring against Greece? And what water source, except for the great rivers, did he not leave drained? For some provided ships, others were arranged for the infantry, to some the horse was assigned, to some horse-transporting ships accompanied the army, to some the task of providing long bridges and ships, and to others the supply of food and ships.
And this, as the first attempts to sail around Athos had resulted in shipwrecks, was being prepared for about three years, especially the works for Athos. For in Elaeus of the Chersonese, triremes were anchored; and from there, various people of the army, driven by whippings, took turns digging, and others went in succession; and also those who lived around Athos dug. Bubares, son of Megabazus, and Artachaees, son of Artaeus, Persian men, were in charge of the work. For Athos is a mountain, large and famous, extending into the sea, inhabited by people. At its end towards the mainland, the mountain forms a peninsula and an isthmus about twelve stadia wide; and this plain, with not very large hills, stretches from the sea of Acanthus to the sea opposite Torone. And on this isthmus, at the end of Athos, there is a Greek city called Sane; and those outside Sane, but inside Athos, the Persian then planned to make into island cities instead of mainland ones: and these are Dion, Olophyxus, Acrothoum, Thyssus, and Cleonae.
These are the cities that inhabit Athos, and the barbarians divided the area in this way for digging, according to their nations: having made a straight line near the city of Sane, and then when the channel became deep, some standing at the very bottom dug, while others passed on the dirt that was always being dug out to others standing above on platforms, and these in turn received it from others, until they reached those at the very top: these then carried it out and threw it away. Now for the others, except for the Phoenicians, the steep sides of the trench collapsing doubled their labor: for as they made the same measurements for both the upper and the lower opening, such a result was going to happen to them. But the Phoenicians show their skill in other works as well as in that one. For having received a portion as much as was assigned to them, they dug the upper opening of the channel making it twice as wide as the channel itself needed to be, and as the work progressed, they always brought it together: and indeed, the work at the bottom was made equal to that of the others. In this place, there is a meadow, where a marketplace and a court were established for them: and much grain was brought to them from Asia, having been ground.
As it seems to me, Xerxes ordered the digging of the canal on account of his pride, wishing to display his power and leave a lasting memory. For although it was possible for them to carry their ships across the isthmus without any trouble, he commanded them to dig a canal through the sea, wide enough for two triremes to sail side by side, rowing together. And to these very same workers, who were also responsible for the digging, it was assigned to build a bridge after having connected the Strymon River.
These things indeed he did thus, and he prepared also arms for the bridges, papyrus and white flax, having commanded the Phoenicians and Egyptians, and to throw down provisions for the army, so that the army might not suffer from hunger nor the draft animals being driven to Hellas. Having inquired about the places, he commanded to throw down where it would be most suitable, bringing different things to different places by cargo ships and transports from Asia everywhere. Most of them indeed were brought to the so-called White Coast of Thrace, and some to Tyrodiza of the Perinthians, and some to Doriscus, and some to Eion on the Strymon, and some to Macedonia having been distributed.
While indeed these ones were working on the task set before them, in this time the entire infantry, having been gathered together with Xerxes, was marching to Sardis, having set out from Critalla in Cappadocia; for it had been said that all the army on the mainland intending to march together with Xerxes himself was to be gathered there. Now, which of the existing army, having been most excellently equipped, led the promised gifts from the king, I am not able to say; for I do not know that they even came to a decision about this matter. And when they had crossed the Halys River and had joined with Phrygia, marching through it, they arrived at Celaenae, where the springs well up of the Maeander River and another not smaller than the Maeander, which happens to have the name Cataractes, which, rising from the very marketplace of the Celaenae, flows out into the Maeander. In this place also the skin of Marsyas the Silenus is hung up, which the story among the Phrygians says was flayed off by Apollo and hung up.
In this city, Pythius, the son of Atys, a Lydian man, hosted the entire army of the king with the greatest hospitality and Xerxes himself, and he promised to provide funds, wishing to contribute to the war. As Pythius promised funds, Xerxes asked the Persians present who Pythius was among men and how much wealth he possessed to promise such things. And they said, "O king, this is the man who gifted your father Darius the golden plane-tree and vine. And now he is the wealthiest of men whom we know, after you."
Amazed by these words, Xerxes himself then asked Pythius how much wealth he had. And he said, "O king, I will neither hide from you nor deceive you by not knowing my own possessions, but knowing the exact truth, I will tell you. For as soon as I learned that you were coming down to the Greek sea, wanting to give you money for the war, I inquired and found, calculating, that I have two thousand talents of silver and four million gold Daric staters, lacking seven thousand. And I give these to you, and for myself, from slaves and lands, there is enough life."
He indeed spoke these things, and Xerxes, being pleased with what was said, spoke, "Foreigner of Lydia, since I went out from the land of Persia, I have not encountered any man who desired to offer hospitality to my army, nor anyone who, standing in my presence, uninvited, desired to contribute money to the war for me, except for you. You, however, have both greatly hosted my army and you promise great sums of money. Therefore, I give you these rewards in return: I make you my friend, and I will fill up the four hundred ten-thousands of staters for you by giving the seven thousands from myself, so that the four hundred ten-thousands may not be lacking seven thousands for you, but may be completed to an even number by me. And acquire for yourself whatever you yourself have acquired, and know that you are always such a person: for doing these things, you will not regret it, neither in the present nor in the time to come."
Having said these things and having accomplished them, he always went on to the next. Passing by a Phrygian city called Anaua and a lake that is formed from the sea, he arrived at Colossae, a great city of Phrygia. In it, the Lycus River, flowing into a chasm of the earth, disappears, and then reappearing at about five stadia at most, it flows out and joins the Maeander River. From Colossae, the army, setting out towards the mountains of the Phrygians and Lydians, arrived at the city of Cydrara, where a pillar has been fixed, set up by Croesus, and it indicates the boundaries through inscriptions.
But when he went from Phrygia into Lydia, with the road splitting and the left leading to Caria and the right to Sardis, and for anyone traveling, it is necessary to cross the Maeander River and go by the city of Callatebus, in which men make honey from tamarisks and wheat, Xerxes, going this way, found a plane-tree, which, for the sake of its beauty, he adorned with golden ornaments and entrusted to an immortal man. On the second day, he arrived at the city of the Lydians.
Arriving in Sardis, Xerxes first sent heralds to Greece to ask for land and water, and to order the preparation of a royal feast; however, he did not send them to Athens or Sparta for the request of land. The reason he sent for land and water a second time was that he thought those who had not given it to Darius' messengers before would now give it out of fear. Therefore, wanting to learn this for certain, he sent them.
After these things, he prepared as if going to Abydos. Meanwhile, they were bridging the Hellespont from Asia to Europe. There is a wide coast of the Chersonese in the Hellespont, between the cities of Sestus and Madytus, stretching down to the sea opposite Abydos. There, not much later in time, under the command of Xanthippus, son of Ariphron, the Athenians captured Artayctes, a Persian man and governor of Sestus, alive and crucified him on a wooden frame. This man, who was also brought to the sanctuary of Protesilaus at Elaeus, committed unholy acts with women.
So, to this shore, setting out from Abydos, they were bridging with what was assigned to them, the Phoenicians with white flaxen cables, and the Egyptians with the other, the papyrus cables. Indeed, there are seven stadia from Abydos to the opposite shore. And indeed, when the strait was yoked, a great storm came upon it and broke and destroyed all those things.
When Xerxes learned, being greatly troubled, he ordered three hundred lashes to be inflicted upon the Hellespont and a pair of shackles to be thrown into the sea. Indeed, I have heard that he also sent branders with these to brand the Hellespont. And so, they were ordered to say, while whipping, barbarous and reckless words: "O bitter water, our master imposes this penalty upon you, because you have wronged him without having suffered any injustice from him. And indeed, King Xerxes will cross over you, whether you wish it or not: but to you, justly, no one of men sacrifices, being a muddy and salty river." And he ordered the sea to be punished with these things and to cut off the heads of those who were appointed to the yoking of the Hellespont.
And those who were assigned to this difficult task began to build new bridges. They did so by placing fifty-oared ships and triremes next to each other, with 360 ships supporting the bridge closest to the Euxine Sea and 314 ships supporting the other bridge. The ships were positioned diagonally to the direction of the Pontus and parallel to the Hellespont's current, so as to reduce the strain on the cables. They secured the ships with large anchors on both ends to withstand winds from the Euxine Sea and the west and south winds from the Aegean Sea. They left a narrow passage for smaller boats to sail through between the fifty-oared ships and triremes, so that one might sail into the Pontus and out of it. Having done this, they stretched the cables from the land and tightened them using wooden windlasses, no longer arranging them separately, but attaching two flaxen cables to each side and four of the papyrus ones. The thickness and beauty were the same for all, but the flaxen ones were heavier in proportion, each cubit weighing a talent. When the crossing was bridged, they cut wooden logs to match the width of the floating supports and placed them on the tightened cables of the tension, and having placed them in succession, they fastened them together. Having done this, they brought brushwood onto the bridge, and having arranged the brushwood, they brought earth onto it, and having packed down the earth, they drew a fence on both sides, so that the draft animals would not be frightened by looking out at the sea and the horses.
But when both the bridges and the work around Athos were completed, and the trenches around the mouth of the canal, which were made for the sake of shallowness, so that the mouth of the excavation would not be filled, and the canal itself was fully reported to be completed, there the army, having wintered, prepared at the same time as spring, set out from Sardis, going to Abydos. And as they set out, the sun, leaving its seat in the sky, became invisible, neither being covered by clouds, and it was mostly clear, and instead of day, night came to be. And when Xerxes saw and learned this, he became concerned, and asked the Magi what the vision intended to show. And they explained that the god was showing the Greeks the eclipse of their cities, saying that the sun was the Greeks' foreteller, and the moon was for them. And having learned this, Xerxes, being very happy, continued the march.
As Xerxes was leading his army, Pythius the Lydian, both frightened by the heavenly vision and encouraged by the gifts he had received, came to Xerxes and said these words: "O master, I would wish to obtain a favor from you, which is easy for you to grant, but would be of great value to me." Xerxes, thinking that he would ask for anything other than what he actually requested, said that he would grant it and indeed ordered him to speak of what he needed. And when he heard this, he bravely said the following: "O master, I happen to have five sons, and all of them are to go with you to wage war against Greece. But you, O king, having pity on me who has reached this age, release one of my sons from the campaign, the eldest, so that he may take care of me and my possessions; and take the other four with you, and having accomplished what you intend, may you return back."
Xerxes was greatly angered and replied thus: "O wicked man, you dared, while I myself am campaigning against Greece and leading my sons, brothers, relatives, and friends, to mention your son, being my slave, who ought to have followed me with his entire household, including his wife? Now understand this well, that in the ears of men dwells the spirit, which, hearing good things, fills the body with delight, but hearing the opposite, becomes angry. When you did good things and promised more, you shall not boast of surpassing the king in benefits; but since you have turned to shamelessness, you shall not receive the worth, but less than the worth. For the hospitality saves you and the four of your sons; but for the one you most desire to keep, you shall be punished with his life." And as he answered thus, he immediately ordered those who were appointed to do these things, to find the eldest of Pythius' sons and cut him in half, and having cut him, to place the halves, one on the right side of the road and the other on the left, and for the army to pass through this way.
Having done this, the army proceeded. First, the baggage carriers and the draft animals went through, and after them, a mixed force of various nations, not separated by divisions but all mixed together. When more than half had passed, there was a gap, and these soldiers did not mix with the king. Indeed, a thousand horsemen from the Persians, all chosen, went first, and after them, a thousand spear-bearers, also chosen from all, with their spears turned down to the ground. After them, ten sacred horses called Nesaean, adorned as beautifully as possible. The Nesaean horses are named for this reason: there is a large plain in Media called Nesaean, and this plain produces these great horses. Behind these ten horses, a sacred chariot of Zeus was placed, drawn by eight white horses, and behind the horses, a charioteer followed on foot, holding the reins; for no man was allowed to step onto this seat. Behind this, Xerxes himself was on a chariot drawn by Nesaean horses, and beside him was his charioteer, named Patiramphes, the son of Otanes, a Persian man.
Xerxes thus drove out from Sardis, and he would change, whenever he desired, from the chariot to a carriage. Behind him, a thousand Persian spearmen, the best and noblest, followed, holding their spears according to custom. After them, another thousand horses from the Persians, chosen, and after the horses, ten thousand foot soldiers, selected from the remaining Persians. Of these, a thousand had golden pomegranates on their spear-shafts instead of spikes and surrounded the others, while the nine thousand within them had silver pomegranates. The soldiers with their spears pointing down also had golden pomegranates, and those closest to Xerxes had golden apples. To these ten thousand, ten thousand Persian horsemen were assigned. After the horsemen, there was a gap of two stadia, and then the rest of the crowd went, all mixed together.
The army made its way from Lydia to the river Caicus and the land of Mysia. Setting out from the Caicus, with Mount Cane on their left, they went through Atarneus to the city of Carene. From this city, they proceeded through the plain of Thebe, passing by the city of Adramytteum and the Pelasgian city of Antandrus. Taking Mount Ida on their left hand, they went into the land of Ilium. And when they had halted for the night under Mount Ida, thunder and lightning fell upon them, and destroyed a considerable part of their number there.
When the army arrived at the river Scamander, which was the first river since they had set out from Sardis on their expedition, it left the stream insufficient and did not provide for the army and the cattle to drink. As Xerxes reached this river, he went up to the citadel of Priam, having a desire to behold it. Having beheld it and learned about each of those things, he sacrificed a thousand cattle to Athena of Ilium, and the Magi poured libations to the heroes. After they had done these things, a fear fell upon the camp during the night. At the same time, with the day, he proceeded from there, on the left leading away from the city of Rhoetium and Ophryneum and Dardanus, which indeed is neighboring to Abydos, and on the right, the Teucrian Gergithae.
When it came to be in the middle of Abydos, Xerxes desired to see the whole army; for a high seat of white stone had been prepared for him on purpose on a hill by the Abydenians, at the command of the king beforehand. As he sat there, looking down upon the shore, he gazed at both the land army and the ships, and desiring to see a contest of the ships, it took place. And when the Phoenicians of Sidon were victorious, he was pleased with both the contest and the army.
And when the time came that the whole Hellespont was hidden by the ships, and all the shores and the plains of Abydos were full of people, then Xerxes considered himself blessed, but after this, he wept.
And learning this, Artabanus, the paternal uncle, who first expressed his opinion freely, not advising Xerxes to march against Greece, this man, having heard that Xerxes wept, asked him the following: "O king, how much you have done now and a little earlier, being separated from each other: for having blessed yourself, you weep." And he said, "For it came to me, having considered, to pity how short the whole human life is, if indeed of these being so many, none will remain in a hundredth year." And he answered, saying, "Other things than this, we have suffered more pitiable things in life. For in such a short life, no man being so fortunate has been born, neither of these nor of the others, to whom it will not often and not once stand by to wish to die rather than to live. For the misfortunes falling upon and the diseases disturbing make the life, being short, seem long. Thus, death has become the most desirable refuge for man from a wretched life, and the god, having tasted the sweet life, is found to be envious, being in it."
Xerxes then answered, saying, "Artabanus, indeed concerning human life, being such as you describe it to be, let us cease and not remember evils while having good matters in our hands. But tell me this: if indeed the vision of the dream did not appear so clearly to you, would you have held your former opinion, not allowing me to march against Greece, or would you have changed it? Please, tell me this truthfully." And he answered, saying, "O king, may the vision that appeared in the dream end as we both desire, but I am still full of fear and not within myself, considering many other things and indeed seeing that the two greatest of all are most hostile to you."
Xerxes then responded to these things, saying, "Divine man, what are these things that you say are the two most hostile to me? Do you indeed think that the infantry is faulty in terms of numbers and that the Greek army appears to be many times larger than ours, or that our naval force will be inferior to theirs, or even both of these things? For if you think that our affairs are lacking in this way, someone should quickly gather another army."
Artabanus then replied, saying, "O king, neither would one blame this army, which indeed has understanding, nor the multitude of the ships. But if you gather more, the two things I speak of become much more hostile. And these two things are the land and the sea. For there is no harbor so great anywhere, as I suppose, which, when a storm arises, will be a secure refuge for this fleet to save the ships. And yet not one harbor alone must there be, but along the whole coast by which you are transporting. Since then there are no harbors sufficient to receive you, know that the misfortunes of men begin and are not the men of the misfortunes. And indeed, of the two things I have mentioned, I come to speak of the other. The land is hostile to you in this way: if it wishes to set up nothing hostile against you, it becomes so much more hostile as you advance further, always stealing away the distance. And there is no satiety of success for men. And indeed, as no one opposes, I say that the land, becoming more in a longer time, will produce famine. And a man would be best in this way: if, while planning, he were fearful, considering every matter, but in action, he were bold."
Xerxes responded with these words, "Artabanus, indeed you reasonably divide each of these matters; but do not fear everything nor equally consider everything. For if you wish for everything to be equally considered in the matter always being brought forward, you would never accomplish anything: it is better to be bold in everything and to suffer half of the terrible things than to be fearful in every matter and never suffer anything. If you were to throw a lot against everything that is said and not accept the certain, you are bound to fail in the same way as the one who says the opposite of these things. This now is equal: how can a man know what is certain? I think not at all. Therefore, those who wish to act, as the whole loves to become gains, but to those who consider everything and are hesitant, it does not greatly wish. You see the Persian affairs to what power they have advanced. If then those kings who came before me had used opinions similar to yours, or not using opinions like these had other such advisers, you would never have seen them advanced to this point: now indeed, throwing risks upon risks, they brought them forward to this. For great affairs are willing to be brought down by great risks. We then, being made like them, will go during the best season of the year, and having overthrown all Europe, we will return back, neither encountering famine anywhere nor suffering any other unhappiness. For indeed, we ourselves are going with a great supply of provisions, and this too, of whatever land and nation we may come upon, we will have their food supply: and we are marching against farmers, not nomads."
Artabanus spoke after this, "O king, since you do not allow any matter to be feared, accept my counsel: for it is necessary to extend a longer discussion concerning many matters. Cyrus, the son of Cambyses, subjected all of Ionia, except for the Athenians, to pay tribute to the Persians. Therefore, I advise you not to bring these men by any means against their fathers: for without them, we are able to become superior to our enemies. For they must either become the most unjust by enslaving their mother city if they follow, or the most just by setting it free. Now, becoming the most unjust, they bring us no great gain, but becoming the most just, they are able to greatly reveal your army. Therefore, put into your heart the old saying that the end of everything does not appear at the same time as the beginning."
Xerxes responded to this, "Artabanus, you are most mistaken in your opinions, especially when you fear that the Ionians might change sides, from whom we have the greatest assurance, of which you can bear witness, as well as the others who accompanied Darius on the expedition against the Scythians, that the entire Persian army was in their power to destroy or save, and they demonstrated righteousness and faithfulness, without any harm. Moreover, leaving their children, wives, and possessions in our land, it is not even worth mentioning that they would do something new. So do not fear this, but with a strong spirit, save my house and my tyranny: for I entrust my scepter to you alone among all."
Having said these things and sent Artabanus to Susa, Xerxes summoned the most distinguished Persians for a second time. When they were present, he spoke to them as follows: "O Persians, I have gathered you here, needing you to be good men and not to disgrace the deeds previously accomplished by the Persians, which are great and worthy of much. Let each one of us and all together have eagerness, for this good thing is being hastened for all. For this reason, I announce beforehand to hold on to the war strenuously: for as I learn, we are going to campaign against good men, of whom if we prevail, no other army of men will ever stand against us. Now, let us cross over, having prayed to the gods who have allotted the Persians."
On that day, they prepared for the crossing; and on the following day, they waited for the sun to rise, wishing to see it ascend, while they burned all sorts of incense on the bridges and strewed the road with myrtle branches. And as the sun rose, Xerxes poured a libation from a golden bowl into the sea, praying to the sun that no such misfortune would befall him as to prevent him from subduing Europe before he reached its farthest limits. And having prayed, he cast the bowl into the Hellespont, and also a golden mixing bowl and a Persian sword, which they call "acinaces." I cannot say for certain whether he dedicated these things to the sun, casting them into the sea, or whether he repented of having scourged the Hellespont and offered the sea these gifts instead.
And when these things were done for them, they crossed; on the one hand, the infantry and all the cavalry crossed the bridge towards the Pontus, and on the other hand, the pack animals and the support teams crossed the bridge towards the Aegean. First, ten thousand Persians, all wearing garlands, led the way, and after them, the mixed army of various nations. These crossed on that day, and on the following day, first the horsemen and those carrying reversed spears crossed, and they too were wearing garlands. After them, the sacred horses and the sacred chariot, and upon them, Xerxes himself, the spearmen, a thousand horsemen, and the rest of the army. And the ships sailed at the same time to the opposite shore. However, I have also heard that the king of all was the last to cross.
When Xerxes crossed into Europe, he observed his army crossing under the whip. His army crossed in seven days and seven nights, without taking any rest. It is said that, after Xerxes had crossed the Hellespont, a man from the region spoke, "O Zeus, why indeed, appearing as a Persian man and taking the name Xerxes instead of Zeus, do you wish to make Greece uprooted, leading all men? For without these, it was possible for you to do these things."
When all had crossed and were setting out on their way, a great omen appeared to them, which Xerxes made no account of, though it was easy to interpret: for a mare gave birth to a hare. This was clearly a sign that Xerxes would lead his army to Greece with great pride and magnificence, but would return to the same place fleeing for his life. Another omen occurred to him in Sardis: a mule gave birth to a mule with double genitals, one male and the other female; the male was above the other. Yet, making no account of either of these signs, he continued his journey, and with him the land army.
The naval force, sailing outside the Hellespont, was conveyed along the land, doing the opposite of the infantry. For it sailed towards the west, making for the headland of Sarpedon, to wait at the place that had been previously told to them; while the army on the mainland made its way towards the dawn and the rising of the sun, through the Chersonese, having on its right the tomb of Helle, the daughter of Athamas, and on its left the city of Cardia, passing through the middle of a city which happens to be named Agora. From there, bending around the gulf called Melas and the river Melas, which did not then withstand the flow of the army but gave out, having crossed this river, on which this gulf also has its name, it went towards the west, passing by the Aeolian city of Aenus and the Stentor marsh, until it arrived at Doriscus.
Doriscus is a part of Thrace, both a beach and a great plain, and through it flows a large river, Hebrus. In this place, a royal fortress had been built, which is called Doriscus, and a Persian guard had been stationed there by Darius since that time when he campaigned against the Scythians. Therefore, Xerxes thought the place was suitable to arrange and count the army, and he did these things. Indeed, all the ships having arrived at Doriscus, the captains, at the command of Xerxes, brought them to the beach near Doriscus, in which there is a city of Samothrace called Sane and Zone, and at the end of it, a famous headland, Serreum. This land in ancient times belonged to the Cicones. Having taken possession of this beach, they drew up the ships and took a break. Meanwhile, Xerxes, in Doriscus, was making a count of the army at this time.
As for the exact number each group contributed to the total, I cannot say for certain, since it is not recorded by anyone. However, the entire land army was found to consist of one million seven hundred thousand soldiers. They were counted in the following manner: ten thousand men were gathered in one place, and after packing them together as tightly as possible, a circle was drawn around them. Having drawn the circle and sent away the ten thousand, a wall of stones was built along the circle, reaching up to a man's navel in height. After completing this, they brought in others into the enclosed area, until they had counted everyone in this manner. Once they had numbered them, they were organized by their respective nations.
The soldiers who were enlisted were these: the Persians were equipped in this way: on their heads, they had loose caps called tiaras, and on their bodies, they wore embroidered sleeved tunics with iron scales resembling fish scales; on their legs, they had trousers, and instead of shields, they carried wicker ones; under these, quivers were hanging; they had short spears, large bows, reed arrows, and daggers hanging from their belts by their right thighs. They were led by Otanes, the father of Xerxes' wife and son of Amestris. They were called Cephenes by the Greeks long ago, but by themselves and their neighbors, they were called Artaei. When Perseus, the son of Danae and Zeus, came to Cepheus, the son of Belus, and took his daughter Andromeda, a son was born to him, whom he named Perses, and left him there; for Cepheus happened to have no male offspring. It was from this Perses that they took their name.
The Medes, indeed, were arrayed in the same manner as the Persians, for this equipment is Median and not Persian. The Medes, however, provided as their leader Tigranes, a man of Achaemenid lineage, and they were called Arians by all in former times, but when Medea, the Colchian, came from Athens to these Arians, they changed their name as well. The Medes themselves say this about themselves. The Cissians, when enlisted, were equipped in all other respects like the Persians, but instead of caps, they wore turbans. Anaphes, the son of Otanes, was the leader of the Cissians. The Hyrcanians, similarly, were arrayed like the Persians, providing as their leader Megapanus, who later became the governor of Babylon.
The Assyrians, when enlisted, had on their heads bronze helmets twisted in a certain barbarian manner, not easily described, and they carried shields and spears and daggers similar to the Egyptian ones, as well as wooden clubs wrapped with iron, and linen breastplates. These people are called Syrians by the Greeks, but by the barbarians, they were called Assyrians. Among them were the Chaldeans. Their leader was Otaspes, son of Artachaees.
The Bactrians, indeed, having on their heads something very close to the Median, were enlisted, and they carried native reed bows and short spears. The Sacae, who were Scythians, had on their heads tall, pointed caps that were stiff, and they had put on trousers, and they carried native bows and daggers, and also axes called "sagaris." These, being Scythians, were called Amyrgian Sacae: for the Persians call all the Scythians Sacae. Hystaspes, son of Darius and Atossa, daughter of Cyrus, was the leader of both the Bactrians and Sacae.
The Indians, indeed, having put on garments made from tree fibers, had reed bows and reed arrows: and on them was iron. The Indians were thus equipped, and they were assigned to serve as soldiers together with Pharnazathres, the son of Artabates.
The Arians, indeed, were equipped with Median bows and the rest like the Bactrians. Sisamnes, the son of Hydarnes, was the leader of the Arians. The Parthians, Chorasmians, Sogdians, Gandarians, and Dadicae, having the same equipment as the Bactrians, served in the army. These were their commanders: Artabazus, the son of Pharnaces, commanded the Parthians and Chorasmians; Azanes, the son of Artaeus, led the Sogdians; and Artyphius, the son of Artabanus, was in charge of the Gandarians and Dadicae.
The Caspians, indeed, having put on cloaks and holding native reed bows and short swords, served in the army. They were equipped in this way, providing as their leader Ariomardus, the brother of Artyphius. The Sarangae, on the other hand, wearing dyed garments and having boots reaching up to the knee, also carried bows and Median spears. Pherendates, the son of Megabazus, was the leader of the Sarangae. The Pactyes, indeed, were cloak-wearers and held native bows and daggers. The Pactyes provided as their leader Artayntes, the son of Ithamitres.
The Utians and Mycians, as well as the Paricanians, were equipped just like the Pactyes. Of these, Arsamenes, the son of Darius, was the leader of the Utians and Mycians, while Siromitres, the son of Oeobazus, was the leader of the Paricanians.
The Arabians, having girded themselves with mantles, had long, curved bows on their right side. The Ethiopians, wearing leopard and lion skins, had long bows made from palmwood strips, not less than four cubits, and short arrows with sharpened stone tips instead of iron. They also had spears with sharpened gazelle horn tips in the manner of a lance, and twisted clubs. Of their bodies, half was smeared with gypsum as they went into battle, and the other half with red paint. Arsames, son of Darius and Artystone, daughter of Cyrus, led the Arabians and Ethiopians who lived above Egypt. Darius loved Artystone the most among his wives and even had a gold statue made of her, hammered out.
Arsames led the Ethiopians above Egypt and the Arabians, while the eastern Ethiopians (for they were part of the army) were assigned to the Indians, differing in appearance not at all from the others, but only in their speech and hair. For the Ethiopians from the sun have straight hair, while those from Libya have the woolliest hair of all people. These Ethiopians from Asia were mostly equipped like the Indians, but they had horse forehead skins on their heads, with the ears sticking out and the mane as a crest; and instead of shields, they made use of crane skins.
The Libyans, indeed, were wearing leather equipment and using burnt wooden javelins, and they provided as their leader Massages, the son of Oarizus.
The Paphlagonians indeed were marching with woven helmets on their heads, small shields and not large spears, and also javelins and daggers, and around their feet, they wore native sandals extending to the middle of the shin. The Ligyes, Matieni, Mariandyni, and Syrians were marching with the same equipment as the Paphlagonians. These Syrians are called Cappadocians by the Persians. Now, Dotus, the son of Megasidrus, was the leader of the Paphlagonians and Matieni, while Gobryas, the son of Darius and Artystone, commanded the Mariandyni, Ligyes, and Syrians.
The Phrygians, indeed, had equipment very close to that of the Paphlagonians, differing only slightly. The Phrygians, as the Macedonians say, were called Briges for as long as they were Europeans, living together with the Macedonians; but when they moved to Asia, they changed both their land and their name to Phrygians. The Armenians, on the other hand, were armed just like the Phrygians, being colonists from Phrygia. Both of these groups were led by Artochmes, who had a daughter of Darius as his wife.
The Lydians, indeed, had arms very similar to those of the Greeks. The Lydians were once called Meiones, but they changed their name after Lydus, the son of Atys. The Mysians, on the other hand, wore native helmets on their heads, carried small shields, and used burnt wood javelins. These people are colonists from Lydia, and they are called Olympieni after Mount Olympus. Artaphrenes, the son of Artaphrenes, led both the Lydians and Mysians. He was the same person who attacked Marathon with Datis.
The Thracians, indeed, having fox-skin caps on their heads, were in the army, and tunics around their bodies, and with embroidered mantles wrapped around, and fawnskin shoes on both their feet and shins, and with javelins and small shields and small daggers. These, having crossed over to Asia, were called Bithynians, but before that, they were called, as they themselves say, Strymonians, dwelling near the Strymon River. They claim to have been forced to leave their homes by the Teucrians and Mysians. Of the Thracians in Asia, Bassaces, son of Artabanus, was the leader.
And they had small raw oxhide shields, and each had two wolf-hunting spears, and on their heads, bronze helmets: and to the helmets, both ears and horns of a bronze ox were attached, and crests were upon them; and their legs were wrapped with strips of purple cloth. Among these men, there is an oracle of Ares.
The Cabelees, also called Meiones and Lasonii, had the same equipment as the Cilicians, which I will describe when I go through the order of the Cilicians. The Milyae, however, had short spears and garments fastened with brooches; they also had bows, better than those of the Lycians, and on their heads, they wore caps made of leather. Badres, son of Hystanes, was the leader of all these people.
The Moschi indeed had wooden helmets around their heads, and shields and small spears; long were the tips. The Tibareni, Macrones, and Mossynoeci, however, were equipped and campaigned just like the Moschi. These people were commanded by the following leaders: Ariomardus, son of Darius and Parmys, daughter of Smerdis, son of Cyrus, led the Moschi and Tibareni; Artayctes, son of Cherasmis, who governed Sestus in the Hellespont, led the Macrones and Mossynoeci.
The Mares indeed had woven helmets native to their heads, and small hide shields and javelins. The Colchians, however, had wooden helmets around their heads, and small raw oxhide shields, short spears, and swords. Pharandates, son of Teaspis, led the Mares and Colchians. The Alarodians and Saspires, however, were equipped and campaigned just like the Colchians. These people were commanded by Masistius, son of Siromitres.
The island nations that followed from the Red Sea, and the islands in which the king settled the people called Exiles, had clothing and weapons very similar to the Medes. Of these islanders, Mardontes, son of Bagaeus, was the leader. In the second year, he was a general at Mykale and died in the battle.
These were the nations that served as infantry on the mainland. Of this army, those who have been mentioned were in command, and those who organized and counted them were also the ones who appointed leaders for groups of thousands and ten thousands, while the leaders of ten thousands appointed leaders for groups of hundreds and tens. Moreover, there were other leaders in charge of smaller units and specific nations.
Indeed, these were the commanders I mentioned earlier, and of these and the whole infantry army, Mardonius, the son of Gobryas, and Tritantaechmes, the son of Artabanus who advised not to wage war against Hellas, and Smerdomenes, the son of Otanes, both of these sons of Darius' brothers, thus becoming cousins to Xerxes, and Masistes, the son of Darius and Atossa, and Gergis, the son of Ariazus, and Megabyzus, the son of Zopyrus, were the generals.
These were the generals of the entire infantry, apart from the Ten Thousand: of these Ten Thousand elite Persians, Hydarnes, the son of Hydarnes, was the commander, and these Persians were called Immortals for this reason: if any of them fell short of the number, either by being forced to death or by illness, another man was chosen, and they were never more or less than ten thousand. The Persians provided the most order among all, and they themselves were the best: they had such equipment as has been mentioned, and apart from having much gold and an abundance of it, they were conspicuous, and they also brought carriages with them, and in them were concubines and many well-equipped servants: and for them, apart from the other soldiers, camels and draft animals carried their food.
These nations had horsemen, but not all of them provided horses, only the Persians did, and they were equipped the same as their infantry. However, on their heads, some of them had helmets made of hammered bronze and iron.
There are indeed some nomadic people called Sagartians, a nation of Persian language and equipment made between the Persian and the Pactyan styles. They provided eight thousand horsemen, but they do not consider having bronze or iron weapons except for daggers, and they use ropes twisted from straps. With these, they trust to go to war. The battle of these men is as follows: when they mix with the enemies, they throw the ropes having nooses at the end; and when they happen to catch, whether a horse or a man, they pull towards themselves. Those who are entangled in the ropes are destroyed.
This was their manner of fighting, and they were arrayed with the Persians: the Medes had the same equipment as their infantry, and the Cissians likewise. The Indians were armed in the same way as their infantry, riding swift horses and driving chariots with horses and wild asses under them. The Bactrians were equipped in the same way as their infantry, and the Caspians similarly. The Libyans were also armed as their infantry, and they too drove chariots. The Caspians and Paricanians were armed in the same way as their infantry as well. The Arabians had the same equipment as their infantry, and they all rode camels that were not lacking in speed compared to horses.
These nations alone had horsemen. The number of cavalry amounted to eighty thousand, apart from the camels and the chariots. Now, the other horsemen were arranged according to their divisions, but the Arabians were positioned at the very end: for since the horses could not bear the camels, they were placed last, so that they would not frighten the cavalry.
The cavalry commanders were Harmamithres and Tithaeus, sons of Datis. The third commander, Pharnuches, was left behind in Sardis due to illness. For as they were setting out from Sardis, an unexpected misfortune befell him: a dog ran under the feet of his horse, and the horse, not seeing it beforehand, was frightened and stood upright, shaking off Pharnuches. Falling, he vomited blood and the disease led to his decline. The horse was immediately treated as he ordered: the servants led it to the place where it had thrown its master, and they cut off its legs at the knees. Thus, Pharnuches was removed from his leadership in this way.
The number of triremes was 1,207, and they were provided by these: the Phoenicians, along with the Syrians in Palestine, supplied 300, equipped in this way: they had helmets on their heads, made very closely in the Greek fashion, and they wore linen breastplates, and they had shields without rims and javelins. These Phoenicians say that they dwelt in ancient times by the Red Sea, and from there they crossed over and dwell by the sea in Syria; and this part of Syria and all the region as far as Egypt is called Palestine. The Egyptians provided 200 ships. They had woven helmets around their heads, and they had hollow shields with large rims, and sea-warfare spears, and great battle-axes. The majority of them were cuirass-bearers, and they had large swords.
These indeed were so equipped, and the Cyprians provided 150 ships, being furnished thus: their heads were wrapped with turbans by their kings, and the others had tunics, and the rest was according to the Greeks. Of these, there are so many tribes, some from Salamis and Athens, some from Arcadia, some from Cythnus, some from Phoenice, and some from Ethiopia, as the Cyprians themselves say.
The Cilicians provided 100 ships. These, in turn, had their heads covered with native helmets, and they carried raw oxhide shields instead of regular ones, and they were dressed in woolen tunics. Each one had two javelins and a sword made similar to Egyptian knives. These people were formerly called Hypachaei, and they got their name from Cilix, the son of Agenor, a Phoenician man. The Pamphylians provided 30 ships, equipped with Greek weapons. These Pamphylians are the descendants of those who were scattered from Troy, together with Amphilochus and Calchas.
The Lycians provided 50 ships, being both cuirass-wearers and greave-wearers, and they had cornel-wood bows and unfeathered reed arrows and javelins. Moreover, they had goat-skins hanging around their shoulders, and around their heads, they had caps crowned with feathers. They also had daggers and scimitars. The Lycians were once called Termilae, having come from Crete, and they got their name from Lycus, the son of Pandion, an Athenian man.
The Dorians from Asia provided thirty ships, having Greek weapons and having come from the Peloponnese. The Carians, on the other hand, provided seventy ships, being equipped in other respects like the Greeks, but also having scythes and daggers. These people, who were called by a different name before, have been mentioned in the earlier parts of my account.
The Ionians, indeed, provided a hundred ships, being equipped as Greeks. The Ionians, for as long a time as they dwelt in the Peloponnese, in the now-called Achaia, and before Danaus and Xuthus arrived in the Peloponnese, as the Greeks say, were called Aegialian Pelasgians; but after Ion, the son of Xuthus, they were called Ionians.
The islanders indeed provided seventeen ships, being equipped as Greeks, and this nation was Pelasgian; but later it was called Ionian according to the same account as the twelve-city Ionians who came from Athens. The Aeolians, on the other hand, provided sixty ships, being equipped as Greeks and formerly called Pelasgians, according to the account of the Greeks. The Hellespontians, except for the Abydenians (for the Abydenians were ordered by the king to stay in their land and be guards of the bridges), the rest of those from the Pontus who were in the army provided a hundred ships, and they were equipped as Greeks. These were colonists of the Ionians and Dorians.
Persians, Medes, and Sacae embarked on all of the ships. Of these, the best ships were provided by the Phoenicians, and among the Phoenicians, the Sidonians. To all these, as well as to those who were assigned to the infantry, there were local leaders for each, whose names I do not mention, for it is not necessary for the account of the history. For neither were the leaders of each nation worthy, and in each nation, as many cities as there were, so many leaders there were, who followed not as generals but rather as slaves, like the rest of the soldiers. For the generals who had overall power and ruled over each of the nations, as many of them as were Persians, have been mentioned by me.
Of the naval forces, the commanders were Ariabignes, son of Darius; Prexaspes, son of Aspathines; Megabazus, son of Megabates; and Achaemenes, son of Darius. Ariabignes, son of Darius and daughter of Gobryas, led the fleet of Ionia and Caria. Achaemenes, brother of Xerxes from both parents, commanded the Egyptian fleet, while the other two commanders led the rest of the forces. In total, there appeared to be 3,000 ships, including those with thirty and fifty oars, light galleys, and large horse transports.
Among those sailing with the commanders, the most renowned were these: Sidonian Tetramnestus, son of Anysus; Tyrian Matten, son of Siromus; Aradian Merbalus, son of Agbalus; Cilician Syennesis, son of Oromedon; Lycian Cyberniscus, son of Sicas; Cyprians Gorgus, son of Chersis, and Timonax, son of Timagoras; and from Caria, Histiaeus, son of Tymnes, Pigres, son of Hysseldomus, and Damasithymus, son of Candaules.
Of the other commanders, I do not remember to mention them, as I am not compelled, but of Artemisia, I especially make a marvel, a woman who campaigned against Greece: she, whose husband having died, held the tyranny herself and having a young son under her care, out of courage and manliness, she campaigned, with no necessity compelling her. Her name indeed was Artemisia, and she was the daughter of Lygdamis, her lineage from her father's side being from Halicarnassus, and from her mother's side, Cretan. She ruled over Halicarnassians, and Coans, and Nisyrians, and Calydnians, providing five ships. And of the entire fleet, after the Sidonian ships, she provided the most distinguished ships, and of all the allies, she gave the best advice to the king. Of the cities I enumerated her ruling, I declare the entire nation to be Dorian, the Halicarnassians being Troezenians, and the others Epidaurians. Thus far, the naval force has been spoken of.
Once the army was organized and counted, Xerxes desired to pass through and observe them himself. And as he did this, he rode in a chariot, passing by each nation's soldiers, inquiring about them. And the scribes recorded everything, until he reached the very last of the horsemen and the infantry. When this was done for him, the ships having been launched into the sea, there Xerxes disembarked from the chariot onto a Sidonian ship, sat under a golden canopy, and sailed past the prows of the ships, questioning each one just as he did with the infantry, and having their answers written down. The captains, having brought their ships about four hundred feet from the shore, turned all the prows towards the land, and having armed the marines as if for war. And he, sailing within the prows, observed them and the shore.
After he had sailed past all these and disembarked from the ship, Xerxes summoned Demaratus, the son of Ariston, who was accompanying him on the expedition to Greece, and asked him the following: "Demaratus, it is now pleasant for me to ask you what I desire. You are a Greek, and as I learn from you and the other Greeks who come to me with their accounts, you are from a city that is neither the least nor the weakest. Now then, tell me this: will the Greeks withstand me, raising their hands against mine? For, as I think, not even if all the Greeks and the rest of the men who dwell towards the west were gathered together, would they be able to withstand me in battle, not being equal in number. Yet, I wish to learn also from you, what you say about them." He asked these things, and the other, taking it up, said, "O king, shall I use the truth in speaking to you, or pleasure?" And he commanded him to use the truth, saying that nothing would be more unpleasant to him than it had been before.
Upon hearing these things, Demaratus spoke thus: "O King, since you command me to use the truth in speaking these things, not lying so that later someone may be caught by you, in Hellas, poverty has always been a companion, but courage is acquired, both from wisdom and strong law: by using this, Hellas repels both poverty and tyranny. Now, I respect all the Greeks who dwell in those Dorian lands, but I come to speak these words not about all of them, but only about the Lacedaemonians: first, that there is no way they will ever accept your words bringing slavery to Hellas, and second, that they will oppose you in battle, even if all the other Greeks think as you do. Concerning their number, do not inquire how many they are, being able to do these things: for if they come forth having an army of a thousand men, these will fight with you, whether they are fewer than this or even more."
Upon hearing this, Xerxes laughed and said, "Demaratus, what a strange thing you say, that a thousand men would fight against such a great army! Tell me, since you claim to have been their king, would you then be willing to fight ten men right now? Indeed, if your people are as you describe, it would be fitting for you, their king, to face twice as many according to your laws. For if each of them is a match for ten men of my army, then you should be a match for twenty, and thus your argument would be correct. But if they are such and so great in number, as many as you and those who converse with me of the Greeks boast, beware lest this speech be spoken in vain. For consider the whole matter: how could a thousand, or ten thousand, or even fifty thousand men, all being equally free and not ruled by one, stand against such an army as this? For we are more than a thousand to one around each of them, even if there were five thousand of them. For if they were ruled by one, as is our custom, they might become better than they naturally are, fearing him, and being driven by the whip, they might go against more numerous weaker men; but being left to freedom, they would not do either. I, for my part, think that even if they were equal in number, it would be difficult for the Greeks to fight against the Persians alone. But this thing you speak of is found only among us, and not much but rarely: for there are some of my Persian spear-bearers who would be willing to fight three Greek men at once: of these you, being inexperienced, speak much nonsense."
In response to this, Demaratus said, "O king, from the beginning I knew that speaking the truth would not be pleasing to you. But since you compelled me to speak the most truthful words, I spoke what was fitting for the Spartans. And yet, as I happen to be now, I am fond of them, and you, above all, should trust me, who, having been deprived of my honors and ancestral privileges, have been made an exile and a fugitive by them, while your father, receiving me, gave me life and a home. It is not fitting for a sensible man to reject apparent goodwill, but rather to cherish it most. I, for my part, do not promise that I am able to fight against ten men or even two, and I would not even willingly fight a single combat. But if it were necessary or if there were some great contest urging me on, I would most gladly fight against one of these men who each claims to be worthy of three Greeks. Thus, the Lacedaemonians, when fighting one by one, are no worse than other men, but when fighting together, they are the best of all men. For being free, they are not entirely free: for there is a master over them, the law, which they fear much more than your men fear you. They do whatever it commands: and it always commands the same thing, not allowing them to flee from battle, no matter how many men there are, but to remain in their ranks and either conquer or die. If, however, I seem to you to be speaking foolishly, I will be silent for the rest of my life: now, having been compelled, I have spoken. But may it be according to your wish, O king."
So Demaratus indeed exchanged these words, and Xerxes turned to laughter and did not make any anger, but dismissed him kindly. Having come to this conversation with Demaratus, and having established Mascames, the son of Megadostes, as the governor in this Doriscus, and having relieved the one appointed by Darius, Xerxes led his army through Thrace towards Greece.
Xerxes left behind such a man as Mascames, to whom alone he sent gifts as the most excellent of all those whom he himself or Darius had appointed as governors, and he sent them every year. And so too did Artaxerxes, the son of Xerxes, send gifts to the descendants of Mascames. For even before this expedition, governors had been appointed in Thrace and throughout the Hellespont. All of these, then, both from Thrace and the Hellespont, except for the one in Doriscus, were later removed by the Greeks after this military expedition. But Mascames in Doriscus could not be removed by anyone, though many tried. For this reason, indeed, gifts were sent to him by the ruling king always among the Persians.
Of those driven out by the Greeks, King Xerxes deemed no man to be good except for Boges alone from Eion, and he did not cease to praise this man, and he honored his surviving children in Persia most highly, since Boges also became worthy of great praise: when he was besieged by the Athenians and Cimon, the son of Miltiades, although it was possible for him to leave under a truce and return to Asia, he did not want to, lest he seem to have survived for the king out of cowardice, but he persevered to the end. And when there was no longer any food left in the wall, having built a large fire, he slaughtered his children and his wife and his concubines and his servants, and then he threw them into the fire, and after these things, he scattered all the gold and silver from the city from the wall into the Strymon River, and having done these things, he threw himself into the fire. Thus, this man is justly praised even to this day by the Persians.
From Doriscus, Xerxes proceeded towards Hellas, and he compelled those who were always in his way to join his army: for, as it has been made clear to me before, all the land up to Thessaly was enslaved and was under the king as a tribute-paying land, both by Megabazus having subdued it and later by Mardonius. And passing by on his journey from Doriscus, first he went by the Samothracian fortresses, of which the last city towards the west is called Mesambria. Next to this is the Thasian city of Stryme, and between them, the river Lisus flows through the middle, which at that time did not withstand providing water for Xerxes' army but failed. And this region was once called Gallaic, but now it is called Briantic: yet, by the most just account, this too belongs to the Ciconians.
After crossing the dried-up stream of the Lisus River, Xerxes passed by these Greek cities: Maronea, Dicaea, and Abdera. Indeed, he went past these and by these famous lakes: the Ismarid Lake, lying between Maronea and Stryme, and the Bistonian Lake near Dicaea, into which two rivers pour their water, the Travus and the Compsantus. But near Abdera, Xerxes passed no famous lake, but the Nestus River flowing into the sea. After these regions, going by the cities on the mainland, he passed by a city which happens to have a lake nearby, about thirty stadia in circumference, full of fish and very salty: this lake, watered only by the pack animals, was drained dry. And the name of this city is Pistyrus.
Xerxes, indeed, passed by these coastal and Greek cities, keeping them on his left hand: and through the lands of these Thracian tribes he made his way, the Paeti, Cicones, Bistones, Sapaei, Dersaei, Edoni, and Satrae. Of these, those who dwelt by the sea followed in the ships: and those of them who inhabited the inland, being subdued by me, except for the Satrae, all the others were compelled to follow on foot.
The Satrae, indeed, never became subject to any man, as far as we know, but have always been free up to my time, being the only Thracians: for they dwell in high mountains, filled with various forests and covered with snow, and they are very skilled in warfare. These people possess the oracle of Dionysus: and this oracle is situated on their highest mountains, and the Bessi, a clan of the Satrae, are the ones who prophesy at the sanctuary, with a priestess who delivers the oracle, just as in Delphi, and there is nothing more elaborate.
Leaving behind the aforementioned land, Xerxes next passed by the fortifications of the Pierians, of which one is named Phagres and another Pergamus. Indeed, he made his way right beside these walls, leaving the Pangaean mountain range on his right hand, which is both large and tall. In this mountain, there are gold and silver mines, which are worked by the Pierians, Odomanti, and especially the Satrae.
Passing by the Paeonians, Doberes, and Paeoplae, who dwell beyond and to the north of the Pangaean mountains, Xerxes went towards the west, until he arrived at both the Strymon River and the city of Eion, of which Boges, who I spoke of a little earlier, was still alive and ruling. And this land, which is around the Pangaean mountain, is called Phyllis, stretching on the one hand towards the west to the Angites River, which flows out into the Strymon, and on the other hand, extending towards the south to the very Strymon River. At this river, the Magi sought favorable omens by sacrificing white horses.
Having performed these rites on the river, and many others besides, they proceeded on their way through the Nine Ways of the Edonians, crossing the bridges they found over the Strymon River. Learning that this place was called Nine Ways, they buried alive nine boys and nine girls, children of the local inhabitants. Burying people alive is a Persian custom; for I have heard that Amestris, the wife of Xerxes, when she grew old, buried alive fourteen sons of distinguished Persians as a thank offering for herself to the god who is said to dwell beneath the earth.
As the army proceeded from the Strymon River, there is a shore towards the setting sun where the inhabited Greek city of Argilus lies beside it; and the region above this is called Bisaltia. From there, having the gulf by Poseideion on his left hand, he went through the plain called Syleus, passing by the Greek city of Stagirus, and arrived at Acanthus, at the same time bringing together each of these nations and those dwelling around the Pangaean mountain, just as I mentioned earlier, having the coastal inhabitants serving in the ships, and those above the sea following on foot. This road, on which King Xerxes drove his army, neither do the Thracians mix up nor sow, but they greatly revere it until my time.
And so when he arrived at Acanthus, Xerxes declared the Acanthians as his guests and he gifted them with Median clothing and praised them, seeing that they themselves were eager for the war and hearing about the canal.
While Xerxes was in Acanthus, Artachaees, the one overseeing the canal, happened to die from illness. He was esteemed by Xerxes and of Achaemenid lineage, and he was the tallest of the Persians, being four finger-breadths short of five royal cubits. He also had the loudest voice among men, so that Xerxes, having suffered a great misfortune, carried him out most beautifully and buried him. The entire army participated in the burial. To this Artachaees, the Acanthians sacrifice as a hero, following an oracle, naming the name.
Indeed, King Xerxes mourned the death of Artachaees. Meanwhile, those who received the Greek army and hosted a feast for Xerxes were brought to every kind of misfortune, so much so that they were driven from their homes. This happened to the Thasians, who, on behalf of their cities on the mainland, received Xerxes' army and hosted a feast. Antipatrus, the son of Orgeus, a distinguished man who was chosen for this task, reported that they had spent four hundred talents of silver on the dinner.
Thus, in a similar manner, the officers in the other cities demonstrated the account. For the feast was such as had been planned and prepared for a long time and with great care: this indeed, as soon as they learned from the heralds who went around announcing, the citizens in the cities divided the corn among themselves and made flour and barley meal for many months; this indeed, they found the finest animals for a price and raised land and water birds in houses and ponds, for the reception of the army; this indeed, they made gold and silver cups and bowls and the other things that are placed on a table, all of them. These things were made for the king himself and those who dined with him, but for the rest of the army, only the food was provided. And when the army arrived, a tent was already set up and prepared for Xerxes himself to make his camp, while the rest of the army was outside. And when it was time for dinner, those who received them had to work, and when they had eaten and spent the night there, on the next day, having taken down the tent and all the furnishings, they would depart in this way, leaving nothing behind but taking everything with them.
Thereupon, indeed, a well-spoken word of Megacreon, a man of Abdera, came to be, who advised the people of Abdera, both men and women, to go to their own temples and sit as suppliants of the gods, asking them to ward off for them the remaining half of the evils that were coming, and to have great gratitude for the past ones, because King Xerxes did not think to take food twice each day: for it would be the case for the people of Abdera, either not to endure Xerxes coming if they also had to prepare a breakfast similar to the dinner, or, having stayed, to suffer the worst of all people.
Though burdened, the townspeople nevertheless carried out the orders given to them. Xerxes, from Acanthus, having instructed the generals of the naval force to wait in Therma, sent the ships away from himself to proceed, to Therma, the one inhabited in the Thermaic Gulf, from which this gulf also has its name; for he learned that it was the shortest way. For up to Acanthus, the army was arranged in this way from Doriscus, making its way: Xerxes, having divided all the infantry into three parts, ordered one of them to go along the sea together with the naval force; of this, indeed, Mardonius and Masistes were in command, while another, having been arranged, went a third of the way inland of the army, of which Tritantaechmes and Gergis were in command; and the third of the divisions, with which Xerxes himself proceeded, went indeed between them, and provided as generals Smerdomenes and Megabyzus.
Now then, the naval force, as it was sent away by Xerxes and sailed through the canal in Athos, which led to the gulf where the cities of Assa, Pilorus, Singus, and Sarte are inhabited, from there, as it also received an army from these cities, it sailed away to the Thermaic Gulf. And bending around Ampelus, the headland of Torone, it passed by these Greek cities, from which it received both ships and an army: Torone, Galepsus, Sermyle, Mecyberna, and Olynthus.
This region is now called Sithonia. The naval force of Xerxes, cutting through from the Ampelus headland to the Canastraean headland, which indeed extends most of the Pallene, from there, both ships and an army were received from Potidaea, Aphytis, Neapolis, Aige, Therambus, Scione, Mende, and Sane; for these are the cities that inhabit what is now called Pallene, but was formerly called Phlegra. Sailing along this region, they went to the aforementioned place, receiving an army from the neighboring cities to Pallene, which border the Thermaic Gulf, and their names are as follows: Lipaxus, Combrea, Aesa, Gigonus, Campsa, Smila, Aenea; and this region of theirs is still called Crossaea even to this day. From Aenea, to the last city I mentioned, from this place, the voyage for the naval force already went into the Thermaic Gulf itself and the Mygdonian land, and sailing, they arrived at both the aforementioned Therma and the city of Sindus and Chalestra on the Axius river, which marks the boundary of the Mygdonian and Bottiaean lands; the cities of Ichnae and Pella have a narrow area by the sea.
Indeed, the naval force was encamped around the Axius river, the city of Therma, and the cities between them, waiting for the king, while Xerxes and the infantry army proceeded from Acanthus, cutting through the inland route, desiring to arrive at Therma. They traveled through the Paeonian and Crestonaean territories to the Cheidorus river, which, beginning from the Crestonaeans, flows through the land of Mygdonia and discharges beside the marshes on the Axius river.
As Xerxes journeyed this way, lions set upon the camels carrying provisions. For the lions, descending during the nights and leaving their own haunts, touched none of the other things, neither pack animals nor humans, but only attacked the camels. I wonder at the cause, whatever it was, that compelled the lions to abstain from the other things and to set upon the camels, since they had neither seen the beast before nor had experience of it.
In these regions, there are indeed many lions and wild oxen, of which the horns are of great size, like those that come to the Greeks. The boundary for these lions is both the river Nestus, which flows through Abdera, and the river Achelous, which flows through Acarnania. For neither to the east of the Nestus in any part of the Europe before it, would one see a lion, nor to the west of the Achelous in the remaining mainland, but they are found in the area between these two rivers.
When Xerxes arrived at Therma, he stationed his army there. His army, encamped by the sea, occupied an area that extended from the city of Therma and the Mygdonian region to the rivers Lydias and Haliacmon, which, mixing their waters together, form the boundary between the lands of Bottiaea and Macedonia. The barbarians were encamped in these places, and of the rivers mentioned, only the Cheidorus, flowing from the Crestonaean region, did not suffice for the army to drink, but was left behind.
When Xerxes saw the Thessalian mountains from Therma, both Olympus and Ossa, being of great height, and learning that there was a narrow pass between them through which the Peneus river flows, and hearing that this way led into Thessaly, he desired to sail and see the mouth of the Peneus, because he intended to march the upper road through the Macedonians who lived below until the Perrhaebi near the city of Gonnus; for he found out that this was the safest way. And as he desired, he did these things: boarding a Sidonian ship, on which he always embarked whenever he wished to do something like this, he gave a signal and the other ships to set sail, leaving his land army behind. And when Xerxes arrived and saw the mouth of the Peneus, he was struck with great wonder, and calling the guides of the road, he asked if it was possible to divert the river and lead it into the sea through another way.
The story goes that Thessaly was once a lake, surrounded on all sides by exceedingly high mountains. For on its east side, both Mount Pelion and Mount Ossa enclose it, their lower slopes merging with one another; on the side of the north wind, there is Olympus; on the side of the west wind, there is Pindus; and on the side of the south wind and the south wind itself, there is Othrys. In the middle of these aforementioned mountains lies Thessaly, being a hollow. So then, with rivers flowing into it and many others besides, these five most famous ones, Peneus, Apidanus, Onochonus, Enipeus, and Pamisus, which now, being collected from these mountains that encircle Thessaly, flow through one narrow channel and have their outlet into the sea, all mixing their water into one: as soon as they are mingled, from that point on, the Peneus, prevailing by its name, makes the others nameless. But in ancient times, it is said, when this channel did not yet exist and this outlet, these rivers, and in addition to these rivers, the Boebean lake, neither being named nor flowing any less than now, made all Thessaly a sea. The Thessalians themselves now say that Poseidon made the channel through which the Peneus flows, speaking reasonably: for whoever believes that Poseidon shakes the earth and that the rifts caused by earthquakes are the works of this god, even seeing that, would say that Poseidon made it: for it is the work of an earthquake, as it seems to me, the parting of the mountains.
The ones being led down, Xerxes asking if there is another exit to the sea for the Peneus, confidently knowing, said, "King, there is no other exit to the sea for this river, but this very one: for all Thessaly is surrounded by mountains." And Xerxes is said to have said in response to this, "Wise men are the Thessalians. They guarded this long ago, knowing that they had a land both easily conquered and quickly flooded. For the river would have been the only thing to block, having led it out of the channel with a dam and having turned it aside through the streams it now flows, so that all Thessaly outside the mountains would become underwater." And he said these things, referring to the sons of Aleuas, because the Thessalians, being the first of the Greeks, gave themselves to the king, Xerxes thinking that they were offering friendship from their entire nation. And having said these things and having looked, he sailed away to Therma.
Indeed, he spent many days in the Pieria region: for the Macedonian mountain was being cleared by a third of the army, so that the entire force might pass through to the Perrhaebians. And indeed, the heralds who had been sent to Greece for the demand of earth arrived, some of them empty-handed, while others brought earth and water.
And those who gave these things were the following: Thessalians, Dolopes, Enienes, Perrhaebians, Locrians, Magnesians, Melians, Achaeans of Phthia, Thebans, and the other Boeotians, except for the Thespians and Plataeans. Upon these, the Greeks who took up arms against the barbarian made a sworn agreement: and the agreement was thus, that as many as gave themselves to the Persian, being Greeks and not compelled, when their affairs were well established, they would dedicate a tenth to the god in Delphi. This, indeed, was the agreement held by the Greeks.
But Xerxes did not send heralds to Athens and Sparta to demand earth and water, and for this reason: previously, when Darius had sent for the same purpose, some of them threw the demanders into a pit, while others threw them into a well, ordering them to bring earth and water for the king from these places. On account of these things, Xerxes did not send those who would demand: as for what misfortune befell the Athenians for doing these things to the heralds, I cannot say anything, except that their land and city were laid waste. But I think this happened not for this reason alone.
So then, the wrath of Talthybius, the herald of Agamemnon, fell upon the Lacedaemonians. For in Sparta there is a sanctuary of Talthybius, and there are also descendants called Talthybiadae, to whom all the embassies from Sparta are given as a privilege. But after these things, the Spartans were unable to obtain favorable omens when they sacrificed, and this happened to them frequently. Being distressed and burdened by misfortune, the Lacedaemonians, with many assemblies being held and such a proclamation being made, if anyone wished to die for the Lacedaemonians before Sparta, Sperthias, the son of Aneristus, and Bulis, the son of Nicolaus, men who were Spartans by birth and who belonged to the first rank in wealth, voluntarily undertook to make atonement to Xerxes for the heralds of Darius who had perished in Sparta. Thus, the Spartans sent these men to the Medes as if they were to be put to death.
The daring of these men was indeed worthy of admiration, as were these words that followed. For as they journeyed to Susa, they came to Hydarnes. Now, Hydarnes was of Persian birth and a general of the coastal people in Asia. He offered them hospitality and hosted a feast, and as he entertained them, he asked this: "Men of Lacedaemon, why do you flee from becoming friends with the king? For you see how the king knows how to honor good men, looking at me and my affairs. In the same way, if you would give yourselves to the king, for you are esteemed by him to be good men, each of you would rule over the land of Hellas, granted by the king." To this, they responded thus: "Hydarnes, your counsel towards us is not on equal terms. For you advise us from experience in one matter, but in another, you are inexperienced: for you know what it is to be a slave, but you have not yet tried freedom, whether it is sweet or not. If you were to taste it, you would not advise us to fight for it with spears alone, but also with axes."
This was their response to Hydarnes. Then, when they went up to Susa and came into the presence of the king, first the guards ordered them and brought force upon them to prostrate themselves before the king, but they said they would not do this, being pushed by them upon their heads; for neither was it their custom to prostrate themselves before a man, nor did they come for this reason. But when they resisted this, they said to them these things, and having such a speech, "O king of the Medes, the Lacedaemonians sent us as a penalty for those messengers who perished in Sparta, to make amends for them." And Xerxes, in his great-mindedness, said that he would not be like the Lacedaemonians: for they, having mixed up all human customs, killed the messengers, but he himself, not doing these things which he reproached them for, nor killing them in return, would release the Lacedaemonians from their guilt.
Thus, the anger of Talthybius was temporarily appeased by the actions of the Spartans, even though Sperthias and Bulis returned to Sparta. But much later in time, during the war between the Peloponnesians and the Athenians, as the Lacedaemonians say, it was stirred up again. This seems to me to have been the most divine occurrence. For indeed, the anger of Talthybius fell upon messengers and did not cease until it came out, and justice was thus served. And the fact that it coincided with the sons of these men who went up to the king because of the anger, with Nicolas, the son of Bulis, and with Aneristus, the son of Sperthias, who captured the Halieis from Tiryns by sailing with a ship full of men, it is clear to me that the matter became divine from the anger. For they were sent as messengers to Asia by the Lacedaemonians, and having been betrayed by Sitalces, the son of Tereus, the king of the Thracians, and by Nymphodorus, the son of Pytheas, a man of Abdera, they were captured at Bisanthe on the Hellespont, and having been taken to Attica, they died at the hands of the Athenians, and with them also Aristeas, the son of Adimantus, a Corinthian man. These things indeed happened many years later after the king's expedition, but I return to the earlier account.
The expedition of the king indeed had a name as if it was marching against Athens, but it was directed against all of Greece. The Greeks, having learned this long ago, did not all act in the same way. For some of them, giving earth and water to the Persian, had courage as if they would suffer nothing unpleasant from the barbarian; but those who did not give were in great fear, since there were neither ships in Greece of a number worthy to fight against the invader, nor were many willing to stand against the war, but rather eagerly inclined to side with the Medes.
Here, I am compelled by necessity to express an opinion that may be unpopular among the majority of people, but nevertheless, I will not hold back from stating what seems to me to be true. If the Athenians, fearing the approaching danger, had abandoned their own land, or even if they had not left but stayed and surrendered themselves to Xerxes, no one would have attempted to oppose the king at sea. If, therefore, no one had opposed Xerxes at sea, then on land, such things would have happened: even if many walls of defense had been built across the Isthmus by the Peloponnesians, the Lacedaemonians would have been betrayed by their unwilling allies, who would have been forced to do so as their cities were captured one by one by the barbarian naval force. Having been abandoned, they would have either bravely accepted great deeds and died nobly, or, seeing the other Greeks siding with the Medes, they would have made an agreement with Xerxes. And so, in both cases, Greece would have come under the Persians. For I cannot understand what help the walls built across the Isthmus would have been, with the king dominating the sea. Now, however, one could say without error that the Athenians were the saviors of Greece. For whichever side they turned to in their affairs, that side was bound to prevail. Having chosen to keep Greece free, they roused all the remaining Greeks who had not sided with the Medes, and with the help of the gods, they drove away the king. Nor did the terrifying oracles that came to them from Delphi and filled them with fear persuade them to abandon Greece, but they stayed and endured the invader coming upon their land.
For the Athenians had sent messengers to Delphi to consult the oracle, and having performed the customary rites around the temple, as they entered the inner chamber and sat down, the Pythia, whose name was Aristonice, spoke thus: "Oh wretched ones, why do you sit? Flee, leaving behind the ends of the earth, the dwellings and the city with its wheel-like circuit. For neither the head remains firm nor the body, nor the lower feet nor the upper hands, nor is anything left in the middle, but all is without strength: for fire and fierce Ares, driving a Syrian chariot, will bring it down." "And he will destroy many other towers as well, not yours alone, and he will give many immortal temples to the harsh fire, which now stand dripping with sweat, trembling with fear, and on the highest roofs black blood has been poured, foreseeing the necessity of evil. But go out of the sanctuary, and let your heart be filled with troubles."
Hearing these things, the Athenian messengers were greatly distressed by the terrible prophecy. But Timon, son of Androbulus, a respected Delphian man, advised them to approach the oracle a second time as suppliants. Persuaded by this, the Athenians said, "Lord, give us a better answer concerning our homeland, having respect for these suppliant branches we bring to you; otherwise, we will not leave your sanctuary, but will stay here until we die." Saying this, the priestess gave them a second oracle: "Pallas cannot persuade Olympian Zeus, though she pleads with many words and clever wisdom. But I will tell you this word again, drawing near to adamant: for all the other things being captured, as many as Cecrops' boundary holds within and the divine hollows of wooded Cithaeron, a wooden wall by Zeus, wide-seeing, is granted to the Trito-born alone to remain untaken, which will help you and your children." "Do not wait for horsemen and foot soldiers, a great army from the continent, to come, but turn your back and withdraw, for you will one day face them. O divine Salamis, you will destroy the children of women, either when the corn is scattered or when it is gathered."
These things seemed more favorable to them than the previous ones, for they were and seemed to be so; having written them down, they departed to Athens. When the interpreters of oracles had gone away and reported to the people, many opinions arose as they sought the meaning of the oracle, and these especially were brought together. The older men said that it seemed to them that the god spoke to them of the acropolis being saved. For the acropolis of the Athenians was fortified in the past with a palisade. Some indeed argued that this wooden wall was the palisade, while others said that the god meant the ships, and they advised to prepare these and leave everything else behind. Those who said that the ships were the wooden wall were confounded by the last two things spoken by the Pythia: "O divine Salamis, you will destroy the children of women, either when the corn is scattered or when it is gathered." According to these words, the opinions of those who said that the ships were the wooden wall were brought together; for the interpreters of oracles took these things in this way, that they must prepare for a naval battle near Salamis and be defeated there.
There was indeed among the Athenians a man who had recently come to the forefront, whose name was Themistocles, and he was called the son of Neocles. This man said that the interpreters of the oracles did not put everything together correctly, saying such things: if the word truly referred to the Athenians, it would not seem to have been spoken so kindly, but rather like this, "O cruel Salamis" instead of "O divine Salamis," if indeed they were going to die around it; but in fact, he understood that the oracle was spoken by the god about the enemies, not about the Athenians. Therefore, he advised them to prepare themselves as if they were going to fight a naval battle, as this was the wooden wall. With Themistocles declaring this, the Athenians recognized that these things were more preferable to them than those of the interpreters of the oracles, who did not allow for a naval battle to be prepared, nor even to raise their hands, but rather to leave the land of Attica and settle in some other place.
Another opinion of Themistocles had prevailed before this time, when the Athenians had come into possession of great wealth in the public treasury, which had come to them from the mines of Laurium. They were about to receive ten drachmas each as a distribution, but then Themistocles persuaded the Athenians to cease from this distribution and instead use these funds to build two hundred ships for the war, referring to the one against Aegina. For this war, having arisen, saved Greece at that time, forcing the Athenians to become seafarers. These ships, indeed, were not used for the purpose they were built for, but they became useful to Greece when needed. These ships, having been built beforehand, were available to the Athenians, and it was necessary to build more. It seemed good to them, after discussing the oracle, to confront the barbarian coming against Greece with their entire fleet, obeying the god, along with the Greeks who were willing.
These, indeed, were the oracles given to the Athenians. And when the Greeks who cared for the betterment of Greece gathered together, giving reason and trust to each other, it seemed good to them, while deliberating, first to reconcile all matters, both the enmities and the wars existing among each other; for they were engaged in conflicts with some others, and the greatest one was between the Athenians and the Aeginetans. Then, after learning that Xerxes was in Sardis with his army, they decided to send spies to Asia to learn of the king's affairs, and to send messengers to Argos to make a truce with the Persians, and to send others to Sicily to Gelon, son of Dinomenes, and to command Corcyra to help Greece, and to send others to Crete, thinking that if somehow the Greek nation would become one and if all, having the same purpose, would act together, since terrible things were coming equally to all Greeks. And the affairs of Gelon were said to be great, not at all inferior to the Greek affairs by much.
As these things seemed good to them, having first resolved their enmities, they sent three men as spies to Asia. And these men, arriving in Sardis and learning about the king's army, as they became known, were questioned by the generals of the land army and were led away as if to be killed. And to them, death had been decided, but when Xerxes learned of these things, blaming the generals' decision, he sent some of his bodyguards, ordering that if they found the spies alive, they should bring them to himself. And as they found them still alive and brought them into the king's sight, then learning for what purpose they had come, he ordered his bodyguards to show them all the land army and the cavalry, and when they had seen these things, being satisfied, to send them away to whatever country they themselves wished, unharmed.
And giving this reason for his command, he instructed them thus: if indeed the spies were destroyed, neither would the Greeks learn beforehand his affairs being of greater importance, nor would they cause any great harm to their enemies, having killed three men: but if these men returned to Greece, he said it seemed that the Greeks, having heard his affairs, would give up their freedom before the invasion, and thus there would be no need for them to march against them having affairs. And this opinion of his was in line with another. For when Xerxes was in Abydos, he saw ships carrying corn from the Black Sea sailing through the Hellespont, and being transported to Aegina and the Peloponnese. His advisors, as they learned that the ships were of the enemy, were ready to seize them, looking to the king whenever he would give the order. But Xerxes asked them where they were sailing, and they said, "To your enemies, Sire, carrying corn." And he, having understood, said, "Are we not also sailing to the same places as these, being supplied with other things and corn? What wrong are they doing to us by carrying food there?"
The spies, having thus observed and been sent away, returned to Europe, and the Greek conspirators, after the sending away of the spies, sent messengers to Argos for the second time. The Argives, however, say that the following happened to them: they learned at once from the beginning that the barbarian was being roused against Greece, and when they learned that the Greeks would try to take them over to the Persian side, they sent diviners to Delphi to consult the god on what would be best for them to do, for six thousand of them had recently died at the hands of the Lacedaemonians and Cleomenes, son of Anaxandrides. It was for this reason that they sent the messengers. The Pythia, in response to their inquiry, told them this: "Hated by those around, dear to the immortal gods, hold the spear in the front, being well-guarded, and guard your head; the head will save the body." This was the first response of the Pythia; but after the messengers came to Argos, they went to the council chamber and spoke the things that had been commanded. The Argives, in response to the things being said, declared that they were ready to do these things, having made a thirty-year peace with the Lacedaemonians and leading half of the entire alliance. And yet, by right, the leadership should belong to them; but nevertheless, they would be content to lead half.
The Argives say that this was the response of their council, even though the oracle advised them not to form an alliance with the Greeks: but they were eager to make a thirty-year treaty, even fearing the oracle, so that their children might grow into adults during these years: and if there were no such treaty and another disaster should overtake them in addition to the misfortune that had already happened, they might not be subject to the Lacedaemonians for the rest of their lives. The envoys from Sparta replied to the things that had been said in the council with these words: they would bring up the matter of the treaty to the majority, but as for the command, they had been instructed to reply, and indeed they said, that they had two kings, while the Argives had one: therefore, it was not possible for either of the kings from Sparta to cease from the command, but there was nothing to prevent the Argive from having an equal vote with the two of their own. Thus, the Argives say that they could not endure the greed of the Spartans, but rather chose to be ruled by the barbarians than to submit to the Lacedaemonians, and they told the envoys to leave the land of the Argives before the sun set, or else they would be treated as enemies.
The Argives themselves speak so much about these matters, but there is another account told throughout Greece, that Xerxes sent a herald to Argos before he even set out to campaign against Greece. When this man arrived, it is said that he spoke, "Men of Argos, King Xerxes says these things to you. We consider ourselves to be Persians descended from the child of Perseus, son of Danae, who was born from Andromeda, the daughter of Cepheus. Thus, we would be your descendants. Therefore, it is not right for us to wage war against our own ancestors, nor for you to become our adversaries by avenging others against us, but rather to sit in peace among yourselves. For if things happen according to my will, I will not esteem anyone greater than you." Hearing these things, it is said that the Argives were moved to action, and while they did not immediately promise to change their ways, when they were to be taken up by the Greeks, they then indeed demanded change, knowing that the Lacedaemonians would not share their power, so that they might have a pretext for living in peace.
But some Greeks say that this account is supported by another event that happened many years later. They say that when Athenian envoys, including Callias son of Hipponicus, were in Susa (also known as the Memnonian) for another matter, the Argives had also sent envoys to Susa at the same time. And these envoys asked Artoxerxes, the son of Xerxes, whether the friendship they had established with Xerxes still remained, as they wished, or if he considered them as enemies. And King Artoxerxes is said to have replied that the friendship indeed remained strong, and he believed that no city was a better friend to him than Argos.
Whether indeed Xerxes sent a herald saying these things to Argos, and Argive messengers went up to Susa asking Artoxerxes about friendship, I do not have the ability to say with certainty, nor do I express any opinion about them other than what the Argives themselves say. But I know this much, that if all people were to bring their private troubles into the middle, wishing to exchange them with their neighbors, after looking into the troubles of those nearby, each of them would gladly carry away their own troubles back. Thus, not even the Argives have been treated most disgracefully. But I must report the things that are said, although I do not absolutely have to believe them, and let this word hold for me throughout the entire account: since these things are also said, that the Argives were the ones who called upon the Persian against Greece, because their spear was badly positioned against the Lacedaemonians, wanting everything to be for themselves before the present grief.
The account of the Argives has been told. Now, concerning Sicily, envoys arrived from the allies to converse with Gelon, and indeed Syagrus from the Lacedaemonians. The ancestor of this Gelon, a settler in Gela, was from the island of Telos, which lies near Triopium. When Gela was being founded by the Lindians from Rhodes and Antiphemus, he did not stay behind. In time, his descendants became priests of the chthonic gods, having obtained this position through one of their ancestors, Telines, in the following manner. Some men of Gela, having been defeated in a factional strife, fled to the city of Mactorium, which is situated above Gela. Telines, then, brought these men back to Gela, having no force of men but the sacred objects of these gods. Where he got these objects or if he acquired them himself, I am not able to say. Trusting in these, he brought them back, on the condition that his descendants would be priests of the gods. This, then, also seems to me to have happened, in addition to what I have learned, that Telines accomplished such a great deed. For such deeds are not accustomed to be done by any ordinary man, but by a soul that is noble and a manly strength. However, he is said to have been the opposite of these qualities among the settlers of Sicily, being more effeminate and a softer man.
This man then acquired this honor: when Cleandrus, son of Pantares, who ruled Gela for seven years, died, killed by Sabyllus, a man of Gela, Hippocrates, the brother of Cleandrus, took up the tyranny. And while Hippocrates held the tyranny, Gelon, being a descendant of the priest Telines, along with many others, including Aenesidemus, son of Pataecus, was a bodyguard of Hippocrates. After not much time, due to his excellence, he was accepted to be the commander of all the cavalry. For when Hippocrates besieged Callipolitans, Naxians, Zanclaeans, Leontinians, and fought against Syracusans and many barbarians, Gelon appeared as a most brilliant man in these wars. Of the cities I mentioned, none except the Syracusans escaped slavery under Hippocrates. The Corinthians and Corcyraeans saved the Syracusans, who had been defeated in a battle by the Elorus River, by making a peace agreement on these terms: that the Syracusans would give Camarina to Hippocrates. Camarina was originally Syracusan.
But when Hippocrates, who had ruled for the same number of years as his brother Cleandrus, died near the city of Hybla while waging war against the Sicels, thus indeed Gelon, in word avenging the sons of Hippocrates, Euclides and Cleandrus, whom the citizens were no longer willing to obey, in deed, as he had prevailed in battle against the Gelans, ruled himself, having deprived the sons of Hippocrates. And after this event, the so-called landed gentry of the Syracusans, who had been expelled by both the common people and their own slaves, called Cyllyrians, Gelon, having brought these down from the city of Casmena to Syracuse, held also these: for the common people of the Syracusans, as Gelon approached, handed over the city and themselves.
After he took over Syracuse, Gelon paid less attention to ruling Gela, entrusting it to his brother Hiero. Instead, he focused on strengthening Syracuse, and the city immediately grew and flourished. For he brought all the people of Camarina to Syracuse and made them citizens, and he demolished the city of Camarina. He did the same for more than half of the citizens of Gela, treating them like the people of Camarina. As for the Megarians in Sicily, when they agreed to terms after being besieged, he took their wealthy citizens, who had waged war against him and expected to be destroyed for this reason, and brought them to Syracuse, making them citizens as well. However, he did not hold the common people of Megara responsible for this war, nor did he expect them to suffer any harm, so he brought them too to Syracuse and allowed them to leave Sicily. He did the same for the Euboeans in Sicily, treating them separately. He did these things to both groups, considering the common people to be the most unpleasant element to live with.
Gelon had become a great tyrant in such a manner, and when the messengers of the Greeks arrived in Syracuse, coming to him in conversation, they said these things: "The Lacedaemonians and their allies sent us, asking you to join against the barbarian. For you must know that a Persian man is coming against Greece, bridging the Hellespont and leading all the eastern army from Asia, intending to wage war against Greece, making a pretext that he is driving against Athens, but having in mind to subdue all of Greece under himself. And you, for you have come to great power and have no small share of Greece, being ruler of Sicily, both help those who are freeing Greece and join in freeing it. For if all Greece is captured, a great force is gathered, and we become worthy opponents to those coming against us. But if some of us betray and others do not wish to take revenge, and the healthy part of Greece is small, then it becomes dangerous that all of Greece may fall. Do not hope that if the Persian destroys us, having won in battle, he will not come to you, but guard against this beforehand. For by helping us, you take revenge for yourself. And for the one who has planned well, the end, as a whole, wishes to turn out well."
The envoys spoke these things, and Gelon was greatly passionate, saying such things: "Men of Greece, having a self-serving argument, you dared to come asking me to join as an ally against the barbarian. But you yourselves, when I asked for help against a foreign army earlier, as I was in conflict with the Carchedonians, and when I wanted to avenge the death of Dorieus, son of Anaxandrides, against the people of Egesta, and when I promised to free the trading ports from which great benefits and revenues have come to you, neither did you come to help me nor to avenge the death of Dorieus, and all these things concerning you are now under the control of barbarians. But indeed, it turned out well for us and our state improved. Now, however, since the war has come around and reached you, thus indeed the memory of Gelon has come to be. Having been dishonored by you, I will not make myself equal to you, but I am ready to help, providing 200 triremes, 20,000 hoplites, 2,000 horsemen, 2,000 archers, 2,000 slingers, and 2,000 light-armed cavalrymen; and I undertake to provide food for the entire Greek army, as long as we wage war. But on such a condition as this, I promise these things, on which I will be the general and leader of the Greeks against the barbarian. On any other condition, neither would I myself come nor would I send others."
Upon hearing these things, Syagrus could not bear it and said the following: "Indeed, Agamemnon, the son of Pelops, would greatly lament if he were to learn that the Spartans had their leadership taken away by Gelon and the Syracusans. But let there be no further mention of this matter, as to how we would hand over the leadership to you; rather, if you wish to help Greece, know that you must be led by the Lacedaemonians. But if you do not think it is right to be led, then do not help at all."
In response to these things, Gelon, since he saw that the words of Syagrus had turned away, revealed to them this final argument: "O stranger of Sparta, reproach coming upon a man loves to bring back his spirit; however, having received insults in the speech, you will not persuade me to be disgraceful in the exchange. But since you all hold so tightly to the leadership, it is fitting for me to hold even more tightly to it, being the leader of an army many times larger and of many more ships. But since the argument stands so opposed to you, we will yield something of the ancient argument: if you lead the infantry, I will lead the naval forces. And if it is a pleasure for you to lead at sea, I am willing to lead the infantry. And either you must be pleased with these things, or go away, devoid of such allies."
Gelon indeed made this proposal, but the Athenian messenger, having anticipated the Lacedaemonian, answered him with these words: "O King of the Syracusans, Greece did not send us to you in need of a leader, but of an army. Yet you do not make it clear how you will send an army without leading Greece, but you are eager to command it. Now, as much as we needed to lead the entire Greek army, we Athenians were content to remain silent, knowing that the Laconian would be sufficient for both of us and would speak in our defense. But since you are driven away from the whole and desire to lead the naval forces, this is how it stands: even if the Laconian allows you to lead them, we will not follow; for this is ours, not wanting the Lacedaemonians themselves. We do not oppose those who wish to lead, but we will not allow anyone else to be the admiral. For in vain would we have been here, having the largest force of Greek sailors, if, being Athenians, we would concede the leadership to the Syracusans, offering the most ancient nation and being the only Greeks who have not migrated. Of these, even Homer, the epic poet, said that the best man came to Troy to arrange and organize the army. Thus, there is no shame for us in saying these things."
Gelon answered thus, "Foreigner from Athens, you have leaders indeed, but you will not have those who will be led. Since, then, you desire to have everything and yield nothing, it would be best for you to depart as quickly as possible and report to Greece that her spring has been taken away from her." This is the meaning of the saying he wished to convey: for it is clear that spring is the most excellent part of the year, and of the Greek forces, his own army. Therefore, he likened Greece, deprived of his alliance, to a year with its spring removed.
The Greek envoys, having thus dealt with Gelon, sailed away. Gelon, fearing for the Greeks lest they should not be able to overcome the barbarian, and deeming it a terrible and unbearable thing to go to the Peloponnese and be ruled by the Lacedaemonians while being the tyrant of Sicily, neglected this path and took another. For as soon as he learned that the Persian had crossed the Hellespont, he sent Cadmus, the son of Scythes, a man of Cos, to Delphi with three fifty-oared ships, carrying much money and friendly words, to watch the outcome of the battle, and if the barbarian should win, to give him the money and offer him earth and water from the lands ruled by Gelon; but if the Greeks should win, to bring it back.
This Cadmus, having previously inherited the rule of Cos from his father, a well-established tyranny, willingly gave up his power to the people of Cos, not due to any impending danger, but out of a sense of justice. He then went to Sicily, where he received and settled in the city of Zancle from the Samians, which changed its name to Messene. This very Cadmus, who had come in such a manner through justice, and whom Gelon himself admired for his fairness, was sent by Gelon. Among the other just deeds he had done, this one was not the least: for having been entrusted with a large amount of money by Gelon, he did not wish to seize it for himself, but when the Greeks had won the naval battle and Xerxes had fled, he too returned to Sicily, bringing back all the money.
The Sicilians, however, say these things, that even though Gelon was about to be ruled by the Lacedaemonians, he would have helped the Greeks, if not for Terillus, son of Crinippus, the tyrant of Himera, having been expelled from Himera by Theron, son of Aenesidemus, the ruler of Acragas. At this time, Terillus brought against him thirty thousand Phoenicians, Libyans, Iberians, Ligyes, Elisyci, Sardinians, and Cyrnians, and their general Amilcas, son of Annon, a king of the Carchedonians. Terillus, having recognized his own friendship and especially through the eagerness of Anaxilaus, son of Cretines, who was the tyrant of Rhegium, gave his own children as hostages to Amilcas and led him to Sicily to avenge his father-in-law. For Anaxilaus had Terillus' daughter, whose name was Cydippe. Thus, it was not possible for Gelon to help the Greeks, so he sent the money to Delphi.
The Sicilians also say these things: that on the same day in Sicily, Gelon and Theron won against Amilcas, the Carchedonian, and in Salamis, the Greeks defeated the Persian. Amilcas, being a Carchedonian through his father and a Syracusan through his mother, ruled the Carchedonians due to his excellence. As the battle took place and he was defeated, I learn that he vanished: for neither alive nor dead did he appear anywhere on earth. For Gelon, having searched everywhere, could not find him at all.
But there is this account told by the Carchedonians themselves, which seems to have some truth to it, that the barbarians fought with the Greeks in Sicily from dawn, beginning until late evening (for it is said to have drawn out the battle so long); and Amilcas, during this time, remaining in the camp, sacrificed and sought favorable omens by burning whole bodies on a large pyre; and seeing the turning of his own men, as it happened, pouring libations on the sacrifices, he threw himself into the fire: thus indeed, being burned, he disappeared. And when Amilcas disappeared in such a manner, whether as the Phoenicians say, or in another way as the Carchedonians and Syracusans, they offer sacrifices to him, and they made monuments in all the cities of the colonies, and the greatest one in Carchedon itself.
These events took place in Sicily. As for the Corcyraeans, they responded to the envoys and acted in the following manner: indeed, the same men who had arrived in Sicily also approached the Corcyraeans, presenting the same arguments as they had to Gelon. The Corcyraeans immediately promised to send help and defend, stating that it was not in their interest to see Greece destroyed; for if it were to fall, they themselves would be enslaved on the very next day. Thus, they ought to retaliate to the best of their ability. They responded in such a favorable manner; however, when it was time to provide assistance, they had other intentions. They prepared sixty ships, and having barely set sail, they approached the Peloponnese, and they anchored their ships around Pylos and Taenarus, the land of the Lacedaemonians, waiting like others to see where the war would fall, not expecting the Greeks to prevail, but rather thinking that the Persian, having gained the upper hand, would rule over all of Greece. They acted deliberately, so that they might have something to say to the Persian king, such as, "O king, we, having been asked by the Greeks to join this war, possess no small power, nor would we have provided the least number of ships, but rather the most, after the Athenians. However, we did not wish to oppose you, nor to do anything displeasing." Saying such things, they hoped to gain something more than the others, which indeed might have happened, as it seems to me. But they had also prepared an excuse for the Greeks, which they indeed used. For when the Greeks accused them of not providing help, they claimed to have prepared sixty triremes, but due to the Etesian winds, they were unable to sail past Malea, and thus they could not reach Salamis, and it was not due to any cowardice that they missed the naval battle.
When the Greeks tried to gain the support of the Cretans, the Cretans responded in the following way: having sent common diviners to Delphi, they asked the god if it would be better for them to avenge Greece. The Pythia answered, "O foolish ones, you complain about the many tears of punishment that Minos sent to you from the vengeance of Menelaus, because they did not help him avenge his death that occurred in Camicus, but you helped those who had the woman from Sparta snatched away by a barbarian man." When the Cretans heard these things being reported, they refrained from the vengeance.
For it is said that Minos, in pursuit of Daedalus, came to Sicania, now called Sicily, and died a violent death. And in time, the Cretans, urged by a god, all except the Polichnites and the Praesians, came with a great fleet to Sicania and besieged the city of Camicus, which in my time was inhabited by the people of Acragas, for five years. But in the end, being unable either to capture it or to remain there because of the famine that had come upon them, they left and went away. And as they were sailing along the coast of Iapygia, a great storm caught them and cast them ashore. And their ships being shattered, and there being no way for them to return to Crete, they founded there the city of Hyria and settled there, and instead of being Cretans they became Iapygian Messapians, and instead of being islanders they became mainland dwellers. And from the city of Hyria they founded other cities, which the Tarentines much later tried to destroy, and this led to a great disaster, so that this was the greatest slaughter of Greeks that we know of, both of the Tarentines themselves and of the Rhegians, who, compelled by Micythus, son of Choerus, and coming to help the Tarentines, died in this way, three thousand in number; but of the Tarentines there was no count. And Micythus, being a servant of Anaxilaus, had been left in charge of Rhegium, and he, being expelled from Rhegium and settling in Tegea of the Arcadians, dedicated many statues at Olympia.
But indeed, concerning the Rhegians and Tarentines, a digression has occurred in my account: as for Crete being deserted, as the Praesians say, it was settled by other people, and especially Greeks; and in the third generation after the death of Minos, the Trojan War took place, in which the Cretans, not being the least valiant, were avengers for Menelaus. And from these events, when they returned from Troy, famine and plague befell both them and their livestock, so that for the second time, Crete was deserted, and now the third group of Cretans inhabit it along with the remaining ones. Indeed, the Pythia, having reminded them of these things, stopped them from wanting to take vengeance on the Greeks.
The Thessalians, compelled by necessity, first sided with the Persians, as they showed their displeasure with the schemes of the Aleuadae. For when they quickly learned that the Persian was about to cross into Europe, they sent messengers to the Isthmus, where chosen representatives of the Greek cities, who had the best intentions for Greece, were gathered. When the Thessalian messengers arrived, they said: "Men of Hellas, we must guard the Olympian pass, so that both Thessaly and all of Greece may be sheltered from the war. We are now ready to guard it together, but it is necessary for you to send a large force as well, so that if you do not send it, know that we will agree with the Persian; for it is not right for us to be destroyed alone, so far in advance of the rest of Greece, on your behalf. Unwilling to help, you are not able to impose any necessity on us; for indeed, no necessity is stronger than inability. But we ourselves will try to devise some means of salvation."
The Thessalians said these things. In response, the Greeks decided to send a land army to Thessaly by sea to guard the entrance. When the army was gathered, they sailed through the Euripus; arriving at Alus in Achaea, they disembarked and proceeded to Thessaly, leaving their ships behind, and arrived at the Tempe pass, which leads from lower Macedonia to Thessaly along the Peneus River, between Mount Olympus and Ossa. There, the Greeks encamped with ten thousand hoplites gathered, and they were joined by the Thessalian cavalry. The Lacedaemonians were led by Euaenetus, son of Carenus, chosen from the Polemarchs but not of the royal family, while the Athenians were led by Themistocles, son of Neocles. They stayed there for only a few days, for messengers from Alexander, son of Amyntas, a Macedonian man, arrived and advised them to withdraw, lest they be trampled by the approaching army, indicating the size of the army and the ships. When these men gave this advice, which seemed good and the Macedonian appeared to be well-disposed towards them, they were persuaded. However, I think that fear was the cause of their persuasion, as they learned that there was another entrance to Thessaly through upper Macedonia, through the Perrhaebians, near the city of Gonnus, which was indeed the route that Xerxes' army took. The Greeks, having descended to their ships, went back to the Isthmus.
This expedition to Thessaly took place while the king was about to cross from Asia to Europe and was already in Abydos. The Thessalians, being deserted by their allies, thus willingly and without hesitation submitted to the Persians, so that in their actions they appeared to be the most useful men to the king.
When the Greeks arrived at the Isthmus, they deliberated on the advice from Alexander, both where they would establish the war and in which regions. The prevailing opinion was to guard the entrance at Thermopylae: for it seemed narrower than the one into Thessaly and at the same time closer to their own territory. However, they did not know about the mountain path, through which the defeated Greeks at Thermopylae were captured, until they arrived at Thermopylae and inquired from the people of Trachis. So, they decided to guard this entrance, not allowing the barbarian to pass into Greece, and for the naval force to sail to Artemisium in the land of Histiaea. For these places are close to one another, so as to learn about the events on each side, and the regions are situated in such a way.
This, then, is Artemisium: from the wide Thracian sea, it gathers into a narrow strait between the island of Sciathus and the mainland of Magnesia; and from the narrow strait, the beach of Artemisium in Euboea receives it, where there is a temple of Artemis. The entrance through Trachis into Hellas is at its narrowest half a plethron. However, this is not the narrowest part of the region, but rather in front of Thermopylae and behind it, both behind at Alpeni, which is a cart-way only, and in front at the Phoenix river, near the city of Anthele, another cart-way only. Of Thermopylae, the mountain towards the west is impassable and precipitous, high, stretching up to Oeta; and towards the dawn, the road is received by the sea and marshes. In this entrance, there are hot baths, which the locals call Basins, and an altar of Heracles is established upon them. A wall had been built across these entrances, and there were gates in it of old. The Phocians had built the wall, fearing the Thessalians when they came from Thesprotia to inhabit the Aeolian land which they now possess. Since the Thessalians tried to subdue them, the Phocians guarded this, and they brought the hot water upon the entrance, so that the place might be channeled, devising every means so that the Thessalians might not invade their land. Now the ancient wall had been built long ago, and most of it lay in ruins due to time; but those who rebuilt it thought that they would repel the barbarian from Hellas here. There is a village closest to the road, named Alpeni: from this, the Greeks were planning to get provisions.
Now these places seemed to the Greeks to be suitable: for having considered everything and calculated that neither in multitude would the barbarians be able to use, nor with horses, in this way it seemed to them to receive the one coming upon Hellas. And when they learned that the Persian was in Pieria, having dispersed from the Isthmus, they marched, some to Thermopylae by land, and others by sea to Artemisium.
The Greeks, indeed, quickly came to help, having been arranged in different directions, and the Delphians in this time were consulting the god on behalf of themselves and Hellas, being greatly worried, and they were advised to pray to the winds: for these would be great allies for Hellas. And the Delphians, having received the oracle, first announced to the Greeks who wished to be free the things that had been prophesied to them, and having announced to them the barbarian, they laid down an immortal favor, being greatly worried. And after these things, the Delphians received an altar for the winds in Thyia, where the precinct of Thyia, the daughter of Cephisus, is, upon which this place also has its name, and they joined them with sacrifices.
Indeed, the Delphians still now propitiate the winds according to the oracle. And the naval force of Xerxes, setting out from the city of Therma, advanced with the ten best sailing ships straight to Sciathus, where there were three Greek ships on guard, one from Troezen, one from Aegina, and one from Athens. These, upon seeing the ships of the barbarians, set off in flight.
Indeed, the Troezenian ship, which Prexinus commanded, was immediately captured by the pursuing barbarians, and then, having brought forth the most distinguished of its crew, they slaughtered him upon the prow of the ship, making a display of the first and most beautiful of the Greeks they had taken. And the name of this man who was sacrificed was Leon; perhaps, indeed, he might have obtained something from his name.
The Aeginetan trireme, of which Asonides was the captain, and it provided some commotion for them, with Pytheas, the son of Ischenous, boarding, who became the best man on that day: he, since the ship was being captured, held out fighting until he was entirely overpowered. And when he fell, he did not die but was still breathing, the Persians, who were boarding the ships, valued him greatly for his excellence, treating the wounds with myrrh and wrapping them with linen bandages: and they, when they later arrived at their own camp, showed him off, marveling and parading him around the entire army well. The others, however, whom they captured on this ship, they went around as slaves.
Indeed, the two ships were captured in this way: the third trireme, however, which was commanded by Phormus, an Athenian man, fled and ran aground at the mouth of the Peneus River. The barbarians took possession of the ship, but not of the men: for as soon as the Athenians had beached the ship, they set off through Thessaly and were brought to Athens.
The Greeks who were stationed at Artemisium learned of these things from signal fires from Sciathus. Having heard and been alarmed, they moved from Artemisium to Chalcis, guarding indeed the Euripus, but leaving day-watchers on the high places of Euboea. And of the ten ships of the barbarians, three drove upon the reef which is between Sciathus and Magnesia, called the Ant. There, the barbarians, having placed a stone pillar on the reef, themselves set out from Therma, as for them the obstacle had become clear, and they sailed with all their ships, eleven days having passed after the king's expulsion from Therma. And the reef was shown to them by Pammon, a Scyrian, being in the strait. And the barbarians, sailing all day, reached the land of Magnesia at Sepias and the beach which is between the city of Casthanaea and the coast of Sepias.
Up to now, the army had reached this place and Thermopylae unharmed, and the number was still such that, as I find by putting it together, of the ships from Asia, there being 1,207, the original group of each of the nations being 241,400, with 200 men counted in each ship. And on these ships, apart from each of the native troops, there were 30 Persian, Mede, and Sacae men. This other group becomes 36,210. I will add to this and the previous number those from the 50-oared ships, making, whether there were more or fewer, 80 men to be in them. These ships were gathered, as was said before, 3,000. So then, there would be 240,000 men in them. This, then, was the naval force from Asia, being in total 517,610, with 6,100 added to this. Of the infantry, there were 700,100, and of the cavalry, there were 80,000. I will add to these the Arabian camel-drivers and the Libyan charioteers, making a total of 20,000 men. And so, the total number of the naval and infantry forces combined becomes 2,317,610, with 6,100 added to this. This army, brought forth from Asia itself, has been mentioned, without the accompanying service and the grain transport ships and as many as sailed in these.
Now, indeed, the army brought from Europe must be added to this whole enumerated force, and it is necessary to speak of an estimation. Now then, the Greeks from Thrace and those from the islands lying off Thrace provided 120 ships: from these ships, there are 24,000 men. As for the infantry, the Thracians, Paeonians, Eordi, Bottiaei, the Chalcidian race, Brygi, Pierians, Macedonians, Perrhaebi, Enienes, Dolopes, Magnesians, Achaeans, and as many as inhabit the coast of Thrace, of these nations, I think there are 300,000. Therefore, these ten thousands added to those from Asia, the total fighting men become 2,641,610.
Of this fighting force being of such a number, the support staff following them, and those on the grain-carrying ships, and indeed on the other ships sailing with the army, I do not think they were fewer than the fighting men, but rather more. And indeed, I make them equal to those and neither more nor fewer: these, being equal, complete the same tens of thousands as those. Thus, five hundred and twenty-eight tens of thousands, and three thousands, and two hundreds, and two tens of men, Xerxes, the son of Darius, led up to the Sepiad headland and Thermopylae.
Here indeed is the total number of Xerxes' army. But of the women, cooks, concubines, and eunuchs, no one could tell the exact number; nor again of the draft animals, and the other pack animals, and the Indian dogs that followed, no one could tell the number because of their multitude. So, it does not surprise me that the streams of the rivers failed, but rather how the provisions held out for so many tens of thousands. For I find, upon calculation, that if each man received a choenix of wheat per day and no more, there would be 11,000 myriads of bushels consumed daily, and 300 more bushels, and 40. I do not take into account provisions for the women, eunuchs, draft animals, and dogs. And of men being so many myriads, for the sake of beauty and greatness, none was more worthy than Xerxes himself to hold this power.
The naval force, indeed, after setting sail and occupying the coast of Magnesia, between the city of Casthanaea and the Sepia headland, the first of the ships anchored near the land, while others were upon those at anchor; for the beach being not large, they anchored in rows eight ships deep out into the sea. This anchorage was thus, and at the same time at dawn, from a clear and calm sky, the sea boiling up, a great storm and a strong east wind, which the people dwelling around these regions call Hellespontian, fell upon them. Now as many of them as learned the wind increasing and had such anchorage, they and their ships were saved by dragging the ships up; but as many ships as the storm caught in the open sea, some it carried out to the Ovens called in Pelion, and others to the beach; and some were wrecked around the very Sepia headland, and others were washed ashore at the city of Meliboea, and others at Casthanaea. The storm was indeed an unbearable thing.
It is said that the Athenians called upon Boreas, the North Wind, from an oracle's advice, having received another prophecy to call upon their son-in-law for assistance. Now Boreas, according to the tale of the Greeks, has an Attic wife, Orithyia, the daughter of Erechtheus. Thus, on account of this relationship, the Athenians, as the story goes, considering Boreas to be their son-in-law, when they were naval-stationed in Chalcis of Euboea, as they learned the storm was increasing, or even before that, they both sacrificed and called upon both Boreas and Orithyia to avenge them and destroy the ships of the barbarians, just as they had done before at Athos. Now whether it was on account of this that Boreas attacked the barbarians, I am not able to say; but the Athenians, at any rate, say that Boreas, having helped them before, then accomplished those things, and having returned, they established a sanctuary for Boreas beside the Ilissus river.
In this disaster, they say that no fewer than 400 ships were destroyed, and countless men and an abundant amount of wealth. Thus, this shipwreck greatly became useful for Ameinocles, the son of Cretines, a Magnesian man who owned land around Sepia. He later collected many gold cups washed up and many silver ones, and he found treasures of the Persians, and he acquired other unspeakable wealth. But although he became very rich from these findings, he was not fortunate in all other things: for there was also an ungracious misfortune that grieved him, being a child-killer.
Of the grain-bearing ships and other vessels being destroyed, there was no number. Thus, the generals of the naval force, fearing that the Thessalians might attack them in their weakened state, built a high barrier from the shipwrecks: for indeed, the storm raged for three days. Finally, the Magi, making offerings and appeasing with enchantments the wind, and in addition to this, sacrificing to Thetis and the Nereids, stopped the wind on the fourth day, or perhaps it ceased of its own accord. They sacrificed to Thetis, having learned from the Ionians the story that she was taken from this place by Peleus, and that the entire coast of Sepia belonged to her and the other Nereids.
Indeed, on the fourth day it had ceased: but for the Greeks, the day-watchers, running down from the peaks of the Euboean, on the second day from when the first storm occurred, they reported all that had happened concerning the shipwreck. And when they learned this, having prayed to Poseidon the savior and pouring out libations, they hastened back to Artemisium as quickly as possible, hoping that there would be only a few opposing ships for them.
So indeed, the second time coming around Artemisium, they anchored their ships, considering Poseidon the savior to be their patron from that time even to this. The barbarians, when the wind ceased and the wave was smoothed, having dragged their ships, sailed along the mainland, and having rounded the headland of Magnesia, they sailed straight into the gulf that leads to Pagasae. There is a place in this gulf of Magnesia, where it is said that Heracles was left behind by Jason and his comrades, having been sent from the Argo for water, when they sailed to Aea in Colchis: for from there they intended, having fetched water, to put out to sea. Now, on this place, the name has become Aphetae. So, in this place, Xerxes' men made their anchorage.
Fifteen of these ships happened to be far behind and somehow saw the Greek ships at Artemisium. The barbarians thought they were their own ships and sailed into the enemies. The commander of these ships was Sandoces, son of Thamasius, the viceroy from Cyme in Aeolia, who had previously been crucified by King Darius for being one of the royal judges and giving an unjust judgment for money. However, when Darius calculated and found that Sandoces had done more good than harm to the royal house, he released him. Having escaped death from King Darius, he was now sailing into the Greeks and was not going to escape a second time. For when the Greeks saw them approaching, they learned of their mistake, and easily captured them as they sailed back.
In one of these ships, Aridolis was captured, the tyrant of Alabanda in Caria; and in another, the Paphian general Penthylus, son of Demonous, who led twelve ships from Paphos, but having lost eleven of them in the storm that occurred near Sepias, he was captured with the one remaining ship as he sailed towards Artemisium. The Greeks, having questioned them to learn what they wanted to know about Xerxes' army, sent them bound to the isthmus of Corinth.
Indeed, the naval force of the barbarians, apart from the fifteen ships which I said were commanded by Sandoces, arrived at Aphetae. And Xerxes, with his infantry, having marched through Thessaly and Achaea, had already entered Malis on the third day. In Thessaly, he held a contest of horses, testing both his own and the Thessalian horse, having heard that it was the best among the Greeks; there, indeed, the Greek horses were far behind. Now, of the rivers in Thessaly, only the Onochonus did not fail the army, its stream being drunk up; and of the flowing rivers in Achaea, not even the largest of them, the Apidanus, could withstand, if not barely.
Upon arriving at Alus in Achaea, Xerxes' guides, wishing to explain everything, told him the local tale about the sanctuary of Laphystian Zeus, how Athamas, son of Aeolus, plotted the death of Phrixus with Ino, and how afterwards, the Achaeans, following a divine prophecy, imposed such contests on his descendants: the eldest of this lineage, they commanded to perform the duties of the town hall, where they themselves kept watch. The Achaeans call the town hall "the People's House." If he enters, there is no way he can leave before he is about to be sacrificed. And still, in addition to these things, many of those who were about to be sacrificed, fearing, fled to another country, and as time passed, if they were caught, they were sent to the town hall: they explained how he was sacrificed, all adorned with garlands, and how he was led out with a procession. These things are suffered by the descendants of Cytissorus, son of Phrixus, because when the Achaeans were purifying the land by divine prophecy and were about to sacrifice Athamas, son of Aeolus, this Cytissorus, arriving from Aea of Colchis, saved him, and having done this, he cast the god's anger upon his own descendants. Xerxes, having heard these things, as they were done in the sacred grove, both performed them himself and commanded his entire army to do so, and he revered the house and the precinct of Athamas' descendants in the same way.
These things indeed in Thessaly and in Achaea: but from these regions he went to Malis by a gulf of the sea, in which there is a tide and a shallow every day. And around this gulf there is a level place, wide in one part and very narrow in another: and around this place high and impassable mountains enclose all the land of Malis, called the Rocks of Trachis. Now the first city on the gulf as one goes from Achaea is Anticyra, by which the river Spercheius, flowing from the Enieni, discharges into the sea. And from this, through twenty furlongs, another river lies with the name Dyras, which is said to have appeared to help Heracles when he was burning. And from this, through another twenty furlongs, there is another river which is called Melas.
The city of Trachis is five stadia away from this Melas River. And in this place, the widest part of all this land from the mountains to the sea, where Trachis is built, is indeed twenty-two thousand plethra of the plain. And of the mountain that encloses the Trachinian land, there is a ravine towards the south of Trachis, and through this ravine, the Asopus River flows along the base of the mountain.
There is, however, another Phoenix River, not large, to the south of the Asopus, which, flowing from these mountains, empties into the Asopus. And by the Phoenix River, it is the narrowest: for only a single cart has been bound. And from the Phoenix River, fifteen stadia are to Thermopylae. And in between the Phoenix River and Thermopylae, there is a village which is named Anthele, lying beside which, indeed, the Asopus, flowing alongside, empties into the sea, and there is a wide space around it, in which a temple of Amphictyonid Demeter is established, and there are seats for the Amphictyons and a temple of Amphictyon himself.
Indeed, King Xerxes was encamped in the Malis region, in Trachis, while the Greeks were in the pass. This place is called Thermopylae by most Greeks, but by the locals and their neighbors, it is called Pylae. Both sides were encamped in these places, with Xerxes dominating all the lands to the north, up to Trachis, while the Greeks controlled the territories to the south and the midday region on this mainland.
And these were the Greeks who were waiting for the Persian in this place: 300 hoplites of the Spartans, and 1,000 of the Tegeans and Mantineans, half of each, and from Orchomenus in Arcadia 120, and from the rest of Arcadia 1,000; so many indeed of the Arcadians, and from Corinth 400, and from Phlius 200, and from Mycenae 80. These indeed were present from the Peloponnese, and from the Boeotians, 700 Thespians and 400 Thebans.
In addition to these, the Opuntian Locrians were called upon, coming with their entire army, and a thousand Phocians. For the Greeks themselves had called upon them, saying through messengers that they themselves had come as the forerunners of the others, and the rest of the allies were expected every day; and the sea was under guard by the Athenians and Aeginetans and those who had been assigned to the naval force, so there was nothing terrible for them: for the one coming against Greece was not a god but a man, and there was no mortal who had not been, nor would be, involved in misfortune from the beginning, and the greatest of them had the greatest misfortunes. Therefore, the one attacking, being mortal, would fall from his pride. And hearing these things, they came to help at Trachis.
Now there were indeed other generals for each city, but the one most admired and leading the entire army was a Lacedaemonian, Leonidas, son of Anaxandrides, son of Leon, son of Eurycratides, son of Anaxander, son of Eurycrates, son of Polydorus, son of Alcamenes, son of Teleclus, son of Archelaus, son of Hegesilaus, son of Doryssus, son of Leobotes, son of Echestratus, son of Agis, son of Eurysthenes, son of Aristodemus, son of Aristomachus, son of Cleodaeus, son of Hyllus, son of Heracles. He unexpectedly obtained the kingship in Sparta.
For there were two older brothers, Cleomenes and Dorieus, and he had been removed from the concern of the kingship. But when Cleomenes died without a male offspring, and Dorieus was no longer alive but had perished in Sicily, thus indeed the kingship ascended to Leonidas, and because he had been born before Cleombrotus: for he was the youngest child of Anaxandrides and indeed also had the daughter of Cleomenes. He then went to Thermopylae, having chosen the established three hundred men and those who happened to have sons: and having taken along, he also arrived with the Thebans whom I have numbered, of whom Leontiades, the son of Eurymachus, was the general. For this reason, Leonidas made an effort to take only these Greeks, because they were greatly accused of supporting the Persians: therefore, he called them to the war, wanting to know whether they would send their men or openly refuse the alliance of the Greeks. But they, having different intentions, sent them.
The Spartans first sent these men with Leonidas, so that seeing these, the other allies would march and not even these would support the Persians, if they learned that they were delaying. And after, for the Carneia was an obstacle for them, they intended, having celebrated the festival and leaving guards in Sparta, to quickly come to their aid with the whole army. Thus, the rest of the allies also agreed and they themselves would do such other things: for at the same time, the Olympic Games coincided with these events. Therefore, not yet thinking that the war in Thermopylae would be decided so quickly, they sent the advance guards.
The Greeks at Thermopylae, when the Persians approached, were afraid and deliberated about withdrawal. Now, to the other Peloponnesians, it seemed good to go to the Peloponnese and guard the Isthmus; but Leonidas, with the Phocians and Locrians vehemently opposing this opinion, decided to stay there and to send messengers to the cities, urging them to come to their aid, as they were too few to withstand the army of the Medes.
While these things were being deliberated by them, Xerxes sent a scout on horseback to see how many there were and what they were doing. He had heard, while still in Thessaly, that a small army was gathered there, and that the leaders were Lacedaemonians and Leonidas, who was of the Heracleid family. When the horseman approached the camp, he observed and looked down upon the whole camp: for those who were stationed within the wall, which they had repaired and were guarding, it was not possible to see; but he learned about those outside, for whom their weapons lay before the wall: it happened that at this time the Lacedaemonians were stationed outside. Indeed, he saw some of the men exercising naked, and others combing their hair. Observing these things, he marveled and learned the number. Having learned everything accurately, he drove back quietly: for neither did anyone pursue him, nor did he encounter much recklessness. Having departed, he told Xerxes all the things he had seen.
When Xerxes heard the scout's report, he could not understand why the Lacedaemonians were preparing to fight to the death, and their actions seemed ridiculous to him. So, he summoned Demaratus, the son of Ariston, who was in his camp. Xerxes asked Demaratus about the Lacedaemonians' actions, wanting to learn their intentions. And he said, "You have heard from me before, when we were setting out for Greece, about these men, and you laughed at me when I told you these things would happen in due time. For me, the truth is a great struggle against you, O King. Listen now: these men have come to fight us for the pass, and they are preparing for it. For they have a custom such as this: when they are about to risk their lives, then they groom their heads. Know this, if you conquer these men and those remaining in Sparta, there is no other nation of men that will endure to raise their hands against you, O King. For now, you are attacking the most beautiful kingdom in Greece and the bravest men." Indeed, the words spoken seemed very unbelievable to Xerxes, and he asked a second time how such a small group, being so few, could fight against his army. And he said, "O King, use me as a liar if these things do not turn out for you in this way as I say."
Speaking these things, Xerxes did not persuade for four days indeed, always hoping they would flee; but on the fifth, as they did not depart but seemed to him to remain out of shamelessness and folly, he sent the Medes and Cissians against them in anger, commanding them to capture and bring them into his sight. And as the Medes rushed upon the Greeks, many fell, and others attacked, and they were not driven away, although greatly suffering. And they made it clear to everyone, and not least to the king himself, that there were many people, but few men. And the battle took place throughout the day.
But when the Medes were defeated, they retreated, and the Persians took their turn to attack, the king called the Immortals, of whom Hydarnes was the leader, as they would easily complete the task. But when they also fought with the Greeks, they brought no more than the Medean army, but the same, as they fought in a narrow place and used shorter spears than the Greeks, and they could not use their multitude. The Lacedaemonians, however, fought worthily of mention, showing other things in not knowing how to fight, and how they would turn their backs, pretending to flee, and the barbarians, seeing them fleeing, pursued with shouting and noise, but when they were caught, they turned to face the barbarians, and turning around, they defeated a countless number of the Persians: and there also fell a few of the Spartans. But when the Persians could not take the entrance, trying and attacking in every way, they drove them back.
In these approaches of the battle, it is said that the king, watching, ran up three times from his throne, fearing for his army. Then indeed they fought in this way, but on the next day, the barbarians did not compete any better. For as there were few, they hoped that they had been wounded and would not be able to raise their hands again, and they engaged in battle. The Greeks, however, were arranged in order and by their nations, and each fought in their part, except for the Phocians: they were positioned on the mountain to guard the path. But when the Persians found nothing different than the previous day, they drove them back.
As the king was at a loss as to what to do with the present matter, Epialtes, son of Eurydemus, a man from Malis, came to him in conversation. Thinking that he would gain something great from the king, he explained the mountain path leading to Thermopylae and destroyed the Greeks who had remained there. Later, fearing the Lacedaemonians, he fled to Thessaly, and for him, fleeing, money was proclaimed by the Pylagori of the Amphictyons gathered at Pylae. In time, however, he went down to Anticyra and died by the hand of Athenades, a man from Trachis. This Athenades killed Epialtes for another reason, which I will indicate in the following accounts, but he was nonetheless honored by the Lacedaemonians no less.
Epialtes indeed thus later died, but there is another story being told, that Onetes, son of Phanagoras, a man from Carystus, and Corydallus from Anticyra are the ones who spoke these words to the king and guided the Persians around the mountain, which is by no means trustworthy to me. For this reason, it is necessary to consider that the Pylagori of the Greeks did not proclaim money for Onetes and Corydallus, but for Epialtes the Trachinian, certainly having learned the most accurate information. And we know this reason for Epialtes fleeing. For Onetes, even if he were not from Malis, might have known this path if he had spent much time in the region. But it is Epialtes who guided the Persians around the mountain along the path; I write him as the one responsible.
Xerxes, indeed, when Epialtes promised to accomplish what he had proposed, immediately became very joyful and sent Hydarnes and his generals, who set out from the camp around the time of the lighting of the lamps. The local Malians had found this path and, having found it, they guided the Thessalians against the Phocians, at the time when the Phocians, having built a wall, were in the shelter of the war. And from so long ago, it had been recognized as not being useful to the Malians.
The path indeed has this nature: it begins from the Asopus river, which flows through the narrow passage, and the same name lies for both this mountain and the path, Anopaea. This Anopaea stretches along the ridge of the mountain, and it ends both at the city of Alpenus, being the first of the Locrians towards the Malians, and at the so-called rock of Blackbuttock and at the seats of the Cercopes, where it is also the narrowest.
Along this path, indeed, with such a nature, the Persians, having crossed the Asopus, traveled the whole night, having the mountains of the Oetaeans on their right and those of the Trachinians on their left. Indeed, as dawn was breaking, they came to be at the peak of the mountain. And at this part of the mountain, as has been said to me before, one thousand Phocian hoplites were guarding, both protecting their own land and watching over the path. For the lower approach was guarded by those who have been mentioned, but the Phocians, having willingly undertaken it for Leonidas, were guarding the mountain path.
The Phocians learned of their ascent in this way: for the Persians, climbing up, went unnoticed, the whole mountain being full of oak trees. Indeed, there was no wind, but a great noise was made, as was likely, by the leaves being trampled underfoot, and the Phocians ran up and began to put on their weapons, and immediately the barbarians were present. But when they saw men arming themselves, they were astonished: for they had expected no one to appear as an adversary, and they encountered an army. At this point, Hydarnes, fearing that the Phocians might be Lacedaemonians, asked Epialtes from what country the army was, and learning the truth, he arranged the Persians as if for battle. But the Phocians, as they were being shot at with many and frequent arrows, fled to the peak of the mountain, knowing that they were attacked first, and prepared as if they were about to perish. These men indeed were thinking this, but the Persians with Epialtes and Hydarnes made no account of the Phocians, and they descended the mountain as quickly as possible.
But for those Greeks in Thermopylae, first indeed the seer Megistias, having seen into the sacred things, declared to them the death that was going to be at dawn, and then also deserters came, who announced the circuit of the Persians. These men indeed signified it still during the night, but thirdly the day-watchers, running down from the heights, already with the day appearing. At this point, the Greeks deliberated, and their opinions were divided: for some indeed did not allow to leave the position, but others opposed. And after this, having been separated, some indeed were departing and, having been dispersed, each turned to their own cities, but others of them, together with Leonidas, prepared to remain there.
It is said, indeed, that Leonidas himself sent them away, caring that they might not perish; but for him and the Spartans present, it was not seemly to abandon the post to which they had come to guard at the beginning. In this matter, I am more of the opinion that Leonidas, since he perceived the allies to be disheartened and unwilling to share the danger, ordered them to depart, but for him to leave was not honorable; yet by staying, great glory was left for him, and the prosperity of Sparta was not wiped out. For the Pythia had prophesied to the Spartans, when they inquired about this war as it was being stirred up at the beginning, that either Lacedaemon would be made desolate by the barbarians or their king would perish. And these things she spoke to them in hexameter verses, saying thus: "For you, inhabitants of wide Sparta, either the great city will be destroyed by the men of Persia, or it will not, but from the line of Heracles, the king of Lacedaemon will perish in mourning. For neither the strength of bulls nor of lions will he hold back, for he has the power of Zeus; nor do I say that he will hold back, before one of these is utterly destroyed." And so, considering these things, Leonidas, wishing to lay down glory for the Spartans alone, sent away the allies rather than, by their counsel being divided, so disorderly did those departing go away.
And to me, this is no small testimony concerning this matter, that even the seer who accompanied this army, Megistias the Acarnanian, said to be descended from Melampus of old, having declared from the sacrifices what was about to happen to them, Leonidas, openly sending him away, so that he might not perish with them. But he, being sent away, did not himself leave; instead, he sent away his only son who was serving in the army.
Now the allied forces who were sent away indeed went and obeyed Leonidas, but only the Thespians and Thebans remained with the Lacedaemonians. Of these, the Thebans stayed unwillingly and not wanting to; for Leonidas held them, making them hostages. But the Thespians most willingly stayed, who said they would not leave Leonidas and those with him, but would stay and die together. And their leader was Demophilus, the son of Diadromes.
At sunrise, Xerxes made libations and, following Epialtes' advice, he waited until the market was at its fullest to attack. For the descent from the mountain was much shorter and more direct than the circuitous route and ascent. So the barbarians around Xerxes advanced, and the Greeks around Leonidas, as they were making their exit towards death, advanced much more than at the beginning into the wider part of the pass. For they were guarding the fortification of the wall, and in the previous days, they had gone out into the narrow parts to fight. But then, mingling outside the narrows, many of the barbarians fell in great numbers: for the leaders of the divisions, holding whips, were striking each man, constantly urging them forward. Many of them indeed fell into the sea and were destroyed, and many more were trampled alive by one another: there was no account of the perishing. For knowing the death that was about to come to them from those going around the mountain, they displayed as much strength as they had, to the greatest extent, against the barbarians, both using up and giving away.
Now indeed, for most of them, their spears happened to be broken at that time, and they were working through the Persians with their swords. And in this struggle, Leonidas fell, having become the best man, and other famous Spartans with him, whose names I learned as men worthy of mention, and I learned also of all the three hundred. And indeed, many other notable Persians fell there, and among them, two sons of Darius, Abrocomes and Hyperanthes, born to Darius from the daughter of Artanes, Phratagune. Now Artanes was the brother of King Darius and the son of Hystaspes and Arsames. And when he gave his daughter to Darius, he also gave his entire household to him, as she was his only child.
Two of Xerxes' brothers indeed fell there fighting, and over the dead body of Leonidas, there was a great struggle between the Persians and the Spartans, in which the Greeks, by their valor, dragged him away and repulsed the enemies four times. This continued until those with Epialtes arrived. When the Greeks learned of their coming, the battle changed: for they retreated to the narrow part of the road behind them, and having passed the wall, they all sat down on the hill, except for the Thebans. This hill is at the entrance, where now the stone lion stands in honor of Leonidas. In this place, they defended themselves with their swords, if they still had them, and with their hands and mouths, the barbarians attacked them with missiles, some advancing from the front and breaking down the wall's defense, while others went around and surrounded them from all sides.
Despite the Spartans and Thespians suffering such losses, a man named Dieneces, a Spartan, is said to have been the bravest. They say that he spoke these words before they engaged with the Medes, having heard from one of the Trachinians that when the barbarians shoot their arrows, they hide the sun due to the multitude of their arrows, so great is their number. But Dieneces, not being alarmed by these things, said, making light of the multitude of the Medes, that the Trachinian stranger brought them all good news, if the Medes would hide the sun with their arrows, for the battle would be in the shade for them and not in the sun.
These and other such words are said to have been left as a memorial by Dieneces the Lacedaemonian. After him, it is said that two Lacedaemonian brothers, Alpheus and Maron, sons of Orsiphantus, showed great bravery. Among the Thespians, the one who was most renowned had the name Dithyrambus, son of Harmatides.
And having been buried there where they fell, and for those who died earlier or were sent away by Leonidas, inscriptions have been written saying these things: "Once, four thousand from the Peloponnese fought against three million." These, indeed, are inscribed for all, but for the Spartans separately: "Oh stranger, tell the Lacedaemonians that here we lie, obeying their words." For the Lacedaemonians, this is it, and for the seer, this: "This is the monument of the famous Megistias, whom the Medes once killed by the Spercheius river, a seer who, knowing clearly the approaching fate, did not endure to leave the leader of Sparta." Now, with inscriptions and pillars, the Amphictyons are those who adorned them, except for the seer's inscription, which is written by Simonides, the son of Leoprepes, as a guest-friend of Megistias.
It is said that two of these three hundred, Eurytus and Aristodemus, both having the common option either to be saved together to Sparta, as they were dismissed from the camp by Leonidas and were suffering from eye infections to the utmost, or if they did not want to return, to die with the others, they did not want to agree to do the other things together, but having been divided in their opinions, Eurytus, learning of the Persians' attack, asked for his weapons and put them on, and ordered his servant to lead him to the fighters, and when he led him, the one who led him ran away, but the one who fell into the group was destroyed, while Aristodemus was left behind, losing his strength. Now, if either Aristodemus alone had returned to Sparta in pain, or if the return of both of them had happened together, it seems to me that the Spartans would not have added any anger to them; but now, with one of them dying and the other holding the same excuse but not wanting to die, they necessarily had to be very angry with Aristodemus.
Now, some say that Aristodemus was saved and returned to Sparta with such an excuse, while others say that he was sent as a messenger from the camp, and although he could have joined the battle, he did not want to, but instead, he remained on the road and survived, while his fellow messenger reached the battle and died.
Having returned to Lacedaemon, Aristodemus held both disgrace and dishonor; and suffering such things, he was dishonored: neither did any of the Spartans kindle fire for him, nor did they converse with him. And he held the disgrace, being called "Aristodemus the Trembler." But in the battle at Plataea, he took back all the blame that had been brought upon him.
It is said, however, that another messenger was sent away to Thessaly from these three hundred and survived, whose name was Pantites. But when this man returned to Sparta and was dishonored, he hanged himself.
The Thebans, of whom Leontiades was the general, indeed fought with the Greeks against the king's army, being compelled by necessity; but when they saw the affairs of the Persians prevailing, then indeed, as the Greeks with Leonidas were pressing towards the hill, having separated from them, they stretched out their hands and went nearer to the barbarians, speaking the most truthful of words, that they also were for the Medes and had been among the first to give earth and water to the king, and had come to Thermopylae under compulsion and were blameless for the harm that had befallen the king. Thus, speaking these things, they were saved: for they had Thessalians as witnesses of these words. However, not all things were fortunate for them: for when the barbarians took them as they came, they killed some of them approaching, and the majority of them, by the command of Xerxes, were branded with the royal marks, beginning with the general Leontiades; of whom, his son Eurymachus was later killed by the Plataeans, having led four hundred Theban men and captured the city of the Plataeans.
Thus indeed the Greeks at Thermopylae fought in this manner. Xerxes, having called Demaratus, began to ask from there, "Demaratus, you are one good man. I infer this from the truth: for everything you said has turned out so. Now, tell me, how many are the remaining Lacedaemonians, and of these, how many are such in war, or even all?" He said, "O king, there is a great multitude of all the Lacedaemonians and many cities. But what you wish to learn, you shall know. There is in Lacedaemon a city called Sparta, of men about eight thousand, and all these are like those who fought here; the other Lacedaemonians indeed are not like these, but they are brave." Xerxes said in response to this, "Demaratus, in what way can we most easily overcome these men? Go on, explain: for you possess their ways of the plans, having become a king."
"My king," Demaratus replied, "if indeed you eagerly desire my advice, it is just for me to tell you the best way: if you would send three hundred ships from your naval force to the Laconian land. There is an island lying off it called Cythera, which Chilon, a man among us who became the wisest, said it would be a greater gain for the Spartans to have sunk beneath the sea rather than to rise above it, always expecting something such as I am explaining to come from it, not foreseeing your expedition, but fearing any expedition of men alike. Launching from this island, let them terrify the Lacedaemonians. With a war being present at their own homes, they will not be formidable to you, lest the rest of Greece, being captured by your infantry, comes to their aid here. And with the rest of Greece being enslaved, the Laconian alone remains weak. But if you do not do these things, expect this to happen: there is a narrow isthmus of the Peloponnese; in this place, with all the Peloponnesians having sworn an oath against you, you must expect to encounter even stronger battles than those which have occurred. But doing that, both this isthmus and the cities will surrender to you without a fight."
After this, Achaemenes spoke, being both the brother of Xerxes and the general of the naval force, happening to be present during the conversation and fearing that Xerxes might be persuaded to do these things. "O king," he said, "I see you listening to the words of a man who either envies your success or even betrays your affairs. For indeed, the Greeks rejoice in such ways: they envy those who prosper and hate the superior. If, with the present fortune, four hundred ships have been wrecked, you will send three hundred more from the camp to sail around the Peloponnese, and the opponents will become worthy of battle. But with the naval force being captured, it becomes difficult for them to handle, and they will not be worthy of battle in the beginning, and the entire naval force will support the infantry and the infantry will support the naval force, both moving together. But if you separate them, neither will you be useful to them nor will they be useful to you. And I have good counsel, focusing on your own affairs, not to mention the affairs of the opponents, where they will establish the war and what they will do, and how many they are in number. For they are indeed sufficient to think about themselves, and we are the same for ourselves. But if the Lacedaemonians go against the Persians in battle, they will not be able to make up for the present wound."
Xerxes responds to these words, "Achaemenes, I think you speak well, and I will do this. Demaratus indeed speaks what he hopes to be the best for me, yet his opinion is surpassed by yours. For I will not accept that he does not have goodwill towards my affairs, both from what he has said before and from the truth that a citizen envies another citizen who is doing well and is silently hostile, and a man would not suggest to a fellow citizen what he thinks is best, unless he were far superior in virtue; but such men are rare. A stranger, however, is most friendly to another stranger who is doing well, and if asked for advice, he would give the best. Therefore, I command that no one should hold any ill-will towards Demaratus, who is a foreigner and my friend, from now on."
Having said these things, Xerxes went through the dead, and having heard that Leonidas was both a king and a general of the Lacedaemonians, he ordered that his head be cut off and crucified. It is clear to me, not only by many other proofs, but also by this, that King Xerxes was most angry with Leonidas while he was alive; for he would never have done such things to the dead man, since the Persians, of all the people I know, especially honor brave men in war. Those who were ordered to do these things carried them out as commanded.
Now I will go back to the part of the story where I left off earlier. The Lacedaemonians first learned that the king was preparing to attack Greece, and so they sent to the oracle at Delphi, where they received the response I mentioned a little earlier: they learned in a marvelous way. For Demaratus, the son of Ariston, having fled to the Medes, as I think and my reason agrees with me, was not well-disposed to the Lacedaemonians, and it is possible to guess whether he did these things out of goodwill or rejoicing in their misfortune. For when Xerxes decided to march against Greece, Demaratus, being in Susa and learning these things, wanted to announce them to the Lacedaemonians. He had no other way to signify it: for it was dangerous not to be caught: but he devised such a thing: taking a double tablet, he scraped off the wax from it, and then wrote the king's plan on the wood of the tablet, and having done these things, he put the wax back on the letters, so that the tablet being carried would not cause any trouble with the guards. And when it arrived in Lacedaemon, the Lacedaemonians could not consult it, until, as I learn, Gorgo, the daughter of Cleomenes and wife of Leonidas, suggested to them, ordering them to scrape the wax, and they would find letters on the wood. Persuaded, they found and read them, and then sent them to the other Greeks. These things are said to have happened in this way.