The Greeks who were assigned to the naval force were these: the Athenians provided 127 ships, and the Plataeans, who were inexperienced in naval affairs, filled the ships with the Athenians due to their courage and eagerness. The Corinthians provided 40 ships, the Megarians 20, and the Chalcidians filled 20, with the Athenians providing the ships. The Aeginetans provided 18, the Sicyonians 12, the Lacedaemonians 10, the Epidaurians 8, the Eretrians 7, the Troezenians 5, the Styrians 2, and the Ceans 2 ships and two 50-oared boats. The Opuntian Locrians also supported them, having seven 50-oared boats.
These, then, were the ones who campaigned at Artemisium, and it has been told to me how each group provided the number of ships. The total number of ships gathered at Artemisium, apart from the 50-oared boats, was 271. The Spartans provided the commander with the greatest power, Eurybiades, son of Euryclides. For the allies did not say that they would follow the Athenians if the Laconian did not lead, but they would dissolve the future army that was about to be.
For in the beginning, there was a discussion, before even sending for an alliance in Sicily, that it would be necessary to entrust the naval command to the Athenians. But when the allies opposed, the Athenians yielded, having greatly considered the preservation of Greece and knowing that if they were to quarrel over the leadership, Greece would be destroyed, rightly understanding: for internal strife is so much worse than a united war, as war is worse than peace. Therefore, knowing this very thing, they did not resist but yielded, as far as they greatly needed them, as they received: for indeed, having pushed back the Persian, they were already making the struggle for his land, putting forward the pretext of Pausanias' arrogance, they threatened the leadership of the Lacedaemonians. But these things happened later.
Then, these Greeks who arrived at Artemisium, when they saw many ships brought down to Aphetae and the whole army full, since the affairs of the barbarians turned out contrary to their expectation or as they themselves thought, losing courage, they were planning to retreat from Artemisium further into Greece. But when the Euboeans knew that they were planning this, they asked Eurybiades to wait a short time, until they could evacuate their children and their household servants. And when they did not persuade him, they persuaded Themistocles, the Athenian general, to stay with a bribe of thirty talents, on which they would stay before Euboea and make the naval battle.
Themistocles made the Greeks stay at Artemisium in this way: he gave Eurybiades five talents of this money, pretending to give it from himself. And when this man was persuaded, Adimantus, son of Ocitus, the Corinthian general, was the only one who still opposed, saying that he would sail away from Artemisium and not stay. To him, Themistocles spoke, swearing, "You will not leave us, since I will give you greater gifts than the Persian king would send you for leaving your allies." And as he said this, he sent three talents of silver to Adimantus' ship. Thus, all of them were persuaded by gifts and were grateful to the Euboeans, and Themistocles himself profited, but he hid the rest of the money, and those who received a share of this money believed it had come from the Athenians for this purpose.
Thus indeed they remained in Euboea and engaged in a naval battle, and it happened as follows. When the barbarians arrived at Aphetae in the early afternoon, they had already heard that a few Greek ships were stationed near Artemisium, and now seeing them, they were eager to attack, in order to capture them. However, they did not think it wise to approach directly for this reason: lest the Greeks, seeing them approaching, would flee and escape under the cover of night. And they intended to prevent their escape, so that not even a fire-bearing ship would be left behind in their account.
In response to this, they devised the following plan: from all the ships, they separated two hundred and sent them around outside of Sciathus, so that they would not be seen by the enemies as they sailed around Euboea, both by Caphereus and around Geraestus into the Euripus, in order to indeed catch those who were arriving there and block their rearward path, while they themselves advanced from the opposite direction. Having planned this, they sent off the appointed ships, not intending to attack the Greeks on this day, nor before the signal would appear to them from the ships sailing around as they arrived. So, they sent these around, and with the remaining ships, they made a count at Aphetae.
In this time, during which they were counting the ships, there was in this camp Scyllias of Scione, the best diver among men at that time, who both saved many of the Persians' possessions in the shipwreck that occurred at Pelion and also acquired many for himself. This Scyllias indeed had in mind to desert to the Greeks even before, but he had not found the opportunity as at that time. Now, in what manner he arrived at the Greeks after this, I am not able to say precisely, but I wonder if the things said are true: for it is said that he dived into the sea at Aphetae and did not come up before he arrived at Artemisium, having passed through the sea for about eighty furlongs. Now, other things are said about this man that are similar to falsehoods, but the things after this are true: however, concerning this, let my opinion be accepted that he arrived at Artemisium by boat. And when he arrived, he immediately signalled to the generals both the shipwreck, how it had happened, and the ships that had been sent around Euboea.
Hearing this, the Greeks held a council among themselves. Many opinions were expressed, but they decided to stay there for that day and to encamp, and then to set sail in the middle of the night and meet the ships that were sailing around. After this, as no one sailed against them, they themselves sailed back towards the barbarians in the late afternoon of the day, wanting to make a trial of them both in battle and in the passage.
Seeing both the other soldiers of Xerxes and the generals approaching with a few ships, they brought upon them utter madness, and they themselves set sail, hoping to easily capture them, greatly hoping indeed, seeing the Greeks' few ships and their own many times more numerous and sailing better. Despising these things, they encircled them in the middle. Now as many of the Ionians as were well-disposed towards the Greeks, they unwillingly went to war and made a great disaster, seeing them surrounded and knowing that none of them would escape; so weak did the affairs of the Greeks appear to them. But as many as were also pleased with what was happening, they made a competition as to how each one, having captured an Athenian ship first, would receive gifts from the king; for the Athenians were the most talked-about among the camps.
When the signal was given to the Greeks, first they positioned the prows of their ships facing the barbarians and gathered the sterns in the middle. Then, at the second signal, they engaged in battle, having been caught in a narrow space and fighting face-to-face. In this battle, they captured thirty ships of the barbarians, including that of Philaon, the brother of Gorgus, the king of Salamis, who was a notable man in the army. The first Greek to capture an enemy ship was an Athenian man, Lycomedes, son of Aeschraeus, and he received the prize for this deed. The battle was fiercely contested, and when night came, it broke off the fighting. The Greeks sailed back to Artemisium, while the barbarians sailed to Aphetae, having fought much more fiercely than expected. In this naval battle, Antidorus, a Lemnian, the only Greek among those with the king, deserted to the Greeks, and for this deed, the Athenians gave him land in Salamis.
As the night came during midsummer, there was abundant water throughout the night and harsh thunderstorms from Pelion. The dead bodies and the shipwrecks were carried towards Aphetae, and they clung around the prows of the ships and disturbed the oar blades. The soldiers who heard these things here were thrown into fear, expecting to be utterly destroyed in the terrible situation they had come to. For before they could even catch their breath from both the shipwreck and the storm that had occurred near Pelion, they were met with a fierce naval battle, and after the naval battle, there was heavy rain and strong torrents rushing into the sea, as well as harsh thunderstorms.
And for these men, such was the night, but for those who were ordered to sail around Euboea, the same night was much more fierce, by so much as they were carried in the open sea, and the end for them was joyless. For as they were sailing, both the storm and the water came upon them near the Hollows of Euboea, being carried by the wind and not knowing where they were being carried, they fell upon the rocks. Everything was done by the god so that the Persian would be equalized with the Greek and not be much greater.
These men, indeed, near the Hollows of Euboea perished: but the barbarians at Aphetae, as the day dawned happily for them, held their ships motionless and they were content to pass the time in the present situation, given their misfortune. To the Greeks, there came to their aid fifty-three Athenian ships. These, indeed, arriving, encouraged them and at the same time a message came, that all the barbarians sailing around Euboea were destroyed by the storm that had occurred. So, waiting for the same hour, they sailed and attacked the Cilician ships: having destroyed these, as it became evening, they sailed back to Artemisium.
On the third day, the barbarian commanders, having suffered greatly from so few Greek ships and fearing Xerxes' wrath, did not wait any longer for the Greeks to initiate the battle, but instead, they set sail around midday. It so happened that these naval battles occurred on the same days as the land battles at Thermopylae. The entire struggle at sea was about the control of the Euripus, just as Leonidas' men were guarding the entrance on land. The Greeks were instructed to prevent the barbarians from entering Greece, while the barbarians aimed to destroy the Greek forces and seize control of the strait. As Xerxes' men sailed in formation, the Greeks remained fearless near Artemisium. The barbarians, forming a crescent shape with their ships, tried to encircle them.
Thence the Greeks sailed back and engaged in battle. In this naval battle, they were quite evenly matched with each other. For Xerxes' army, due to its great size and multitude, fell upon itself, with the ships being thrown into confusion and crashing into one another. Nevertheless, they held their ground and did not yield, for it was a terrible thing to be driven into flight by so few ships. Indeed, many of the Greek ships were destroyed, and many men were lost, but far more of the barbarian ships and men were lost. Thus, fighting in this manner, both sides withdrew and separated from each other.
In this naval battle, the Egyptians of Xerxes' forces excelled, who not only performed great deeds but also captured five Greek ships with their men. On the other hand, among the Greeks on that day, the Athenians excelled, and of the Athenians, Clinias, son of Alcibiades, who provided for the war effort at his own expense with two hundred men and a private ship.
As they separated, both sides eagerly hastened to their harbors. The Greeks, having been distinguished from the naval battle, gained control of the dead and the shipwrecks, but they were also worn out, and not least the Athenians, whose half of the ships were damaged. They then indeed planned to retreat into the interior of Greece.
Themistocles, having conceived in his mind that if the Ionian and Carian nations were to be torn away from the barbarian, they might be able to prevail over the remaining forces, while the Euboeans were driving their sheep down to this sea, gathered the generals and told them that he thought he had a certain device by which he hoped to detach the best of the king's allies. He prepared them thus far, but as for the matters at hand, he said that they must do the following: they should sacrifice as many of the Euboean sheep as anyone wished, for it was better for the army to have them than for the enemies; he also urged them to command each of their own men to light a fire, and as for the time of their return, he would take care of it so that they would arrive safely in Greece. They were pleased to do this, and immediately lighting a fire, they turned to the sheep.
For the Euboeans, having disregarded the oracle of Bacis as saying nothing, neither removed anything nor prepared themselves as if war were coming upon them, and they brought about their own affairs to be in a precarious state. For the oracle of Bacis concerning these things goes as follows: "Beware, when a foreign-speaking man casts a papyrus yoke upon the sea, to keep the long-haired goats away from Euboea." Having made no use of these words, in the troubles that were then present and expected, it was available for them to suffer misfortune in the greatest matters.
These men, indeed, were pressing on with these tasks, and the scout from Trachis was present. For there was at Artemisium a scout, Polyas, of Anticyrean descent, to whom it was assigned, and he had a rowing ship ready, if the naval force should suffer defeat, to signal to those in Thermopylae. And in the same way, Abronichus, son of Lysicles, an Athenian, was with Leonidas, ready to announce to those at Artemisium with a thirty-oared ship, if anything newer should befall the infantry. So, this Abronichus, arriving, signaled to them the things that had happened concerning Leonidas and his army. And when they learned these things, they no longer made delays for their departure, but they were being conveyed away as each was arranged, Corinthians first, and Athenians last.
Themistocles, having chosen the best Athenian ships, proceeded to the places with drinkable water, cutting letters into the stones. The Ionians, arriving at Artemisium the next day, read these letters. The letters said this: "Men of Ionia, you do not act justly, fighting against your fathers and enslaving Greece. Rather, join us most of all; if this is not possible for you to do, then withdraw from the middle of us and ask the Carians to do the same for you. If neither of these is possible, but you are bound by a greater necessity than to withdraw, then in the deed, when we mix together, act with ill-will, remembering that you have come from us and that the enmity against the barbarian has come to us from you." Themistocles wrote these things, it seems to me, thinking of both, so that either the letters, escaping the notice of the king, would make the Ionians change sides and become for themselves, or, since it was brought up and reported to Xerxes, would make the Ionians untrustworthy and hold them back from the naval battles.
Themistocles indeed wrote these things; and to the barbarians immediately after this, a man from Histiaea came by boat, announcing the flight from Artemisium of the Greeks. They, however, due to disbelief, held the messenger in custody, and sent swift ships to scout ahead; and when these reported what was the case, thus indeed with the sun dispersing, the entire army sailed upon the sea towards Artemisium. And stopping in this place until midday, from there they sailed to Histiaea; and arriving, they took the city of the Histiaeans, and of the Ellopian part of the land of Histiaea, they ran through all the coastal regions.
While these things were happening, Xerxes, having prepared matters concerning the dead, sent a herald to the naval force; and he prepared the following: of his own army who were dead at Thermopylae (and there were about twenty thousand), leaving behind about a thousand, he dug trenches for the rest and buried them, covering them with leaves and spreading earth over them, so that they might not be seen by the naval force. And when the herald crossed over to Histiaea, having gathered the entire camp, he said these things: "Men, allies, King Xerxes grants to any of you who wish to leave your position and come to see how he fights against those foolish men who hoped to surpass the king's power."
After this announcement, there was no shortage of boats, as so many people wanted to see the dead. Having crossed over, they observed the corpses, and everyone believed that all the fallen were Lacedaemonians and Thespians, as they also saw the helots. Indeed, those who had crossed over were not deceived by Xerxes' actions regarding his own dead; for it was quite laughable: a thousand of them were seen lying dead, while all the Greeks were gathered together in the same place, four thousand in number. On that day, they turned their attention to the sight, and on the following day, some sailed back to Histiaea to their ships, while others, with Xerxes, set out on the road.
A few men came to them as deserters from Arcadia, in need of livelihood and wishing to be active. Bringing these men into the king's sight, the Persians inquired about the Greeks, what they were doing; and one in particular was asking them these things. They said that they were holding the Olympic games and watching a contest of athletics and equestrian sports. Then he asked what the prize was for them, around which they were competing; and they said it was an olive wreath that was given. At this point, Tigranes, the son of Artabanus, uttered a most noble opinion, but owed cowardice to the king. For when he learned that the prize was a wreath and not money, he could not bear to be silent and said to everyone, "Alas, Mardonius, against what kind of men have you brought us to fight, who contend not for money but for excellence?" Thus, these things were said by him.
In the meantime, after the disaster at Thermopylae had occurred, immediately the Thessalians sent a herald to the Phocians, as they always had anger towards them, and from the recent disaster even more so. For having invaded the Phocians with their entire army, both the Thessalians themselves and their allies, not many years before this expedition of the king, they were defeated by the Phocians and were badly treated in a shameful manner. For when the Phocians had been driven into Mount Parnassus, having with them a diviner, Tellias the Elean, this Tellias devised for them the following plan. He covered six hundred of the best Phocian men, themselves and their armor, with gypsum, and attacked the Thessalians at night, having instructed them that any man they saw not covered in white, they should kill. So when the Thessalian guards first saw these men, they were frightened, thinking it was some other kind of monster, and after the guards, the entire army was frightened in such a way that the Phocians took control of four thousand dead bodies and shields, of which they dedicated half at Abae and the other half at Delphi. The tenth part of the money from this battle became the large statues that stand around the tripod in front of the temple at Delphi, and other such statues are dedicated at Abae.
These things, indeed, the Phocians did to the Thessalian foot soldiers besieging themselves: but when the Thessalians' cavalry invaded their land, they inflicted irreparable damage upon them. For in the invasion which is near Hyampolis, in this place, having dug a large trench, they placed empty jars into it, and having heaped soil on top and made it similar to the rest of the land, they awaited the Thessalians invading. And as they rushed to carry off the Phocians, they fell into the jars. There, the horses' legs were destroyed.
Indeed, having a grudge against them for both of these things, the Thessalians sent a herald and spoke these words: "O Phocians, by now you should rather recognize that you are not equal to us. For in the past among the Greeks, as long as those things were pleasing to us, we always had more honor than you. And now, with the barbarians, we have so much power that it is up to us to deprive you of your land and enslave you. However, having everything, we do not bear a grudge, but let there be fifty talents of silver for us instead of those things, and we shall undertake to turn away the things coming upon your land."
The Thessalians made this offer to the Phocians. For the Phocians alone of the people in this region did not medize, for no other reason, as I find upon consideration, than their hatred of the Thessalians: and if the Thessalians had been increasing the power of the Greeks, as it seems to me, the Phocians would have medized. When the Thessalians made this offer, they said they would neither give money nor allow the Thessalians to medize on equal terms with them, if they so desired: but they would not willingly be betrayers of Greece.
When these words were brought back, the Thessalians, being angry with the Phocians, thus indeed became guides to the barbarian on the way. From Trachis, they led them into Doris; for the land of Doris has a narrow pass stretching this way, about thirty stadia in width at most, lying between the Malian and Phocian territories, which was formerly called Dryopis; and this land is the mother-city of the Dorians who are in the Peloponnese. So, the barbarians, having entered this Doris land, did not ravage it; for they were medizing, and it did not seem right to the Thessalians.
But when they invaded from Doris into Phocis, they did not capture the Phocians themselves. For some of the Phocians went up to the heights of Parnassus. And there is a suitable place on Parnassus to receive a multitude, the peak lying by the city of Neon; and its name is Tithorea. To this, they carried up and went up themselves. But more of them were carried out to the Ozolian Locrians, to the city of Amphissa, which is inhabited above the Crisaean plain. And the barbarians ran through the whole region of Phocis: for the Thessalians thus led the army; and whatever they took, they set everything on fire and cut down, and entering the cities, they set fire to them and the temples.
For as they journeyed along this way by the Cephisus River, they laid waste to everything, and they burned down the city of Drymus, and Charadra, and Erochus, and Tethronium, and Amphicaea, and Neon, and Pediea, and Tritea, and Elatea, and Hyampolis, and Parapotamii, and Abae, where there was a rich temple of Apollo, adorned with many treasures and offerings: and there was also an oracle there at that time and even now. And having plundered this temple, they set it on fire. And pursuing some of the Phocians near the mountains, they captured them, and they destroyed some women, being violated by the multitude.
As the barbarians passed by Parapotamii, they reached Panopea. From there, their army was already divided. The majority and the strongest part of the army, along with Xerxes himself, marched towards Athens and entered the land of the Orchomenians in Boeotia. The entire multitude of the Boeotians sided with the Medes, and their cities were saved by Macedonian men who were assigned to protect them, having been sent by Alexander. They saved them in this way, clearly wanting to show Xerxes that the Boeotians were of the same mind as the Medes.
These indeed of the barbarians turned this way, while others of them having leaders set out towards the sanctuary in Delphi, having Parnassus on their right. And as many as these also occupied of Phocis, they ravaged all: for they burned the city of the Panopeans and of the Daulians and of the Aeolidae. They went this way having been separated from the rest of the army for these reasons, so that having plundered the sanctuary in Delphi, they might present the wealth to King Xerxes. Xerxes knew all the things in the sanctuary that were worthy of mention, as I inquire, better than those he left in his own palace, with many always speaking, and especially the dedicatory offerings of Croesus, the son of Alyattes.
The Delphians, learning of these things, were filled with great fear and dread, and they sought divination concerning the sacred treasures, whether they should bury them in the ground or carry them away to another land. But the god did not allow them to move them, saying that he himself was able to protect his own possessions. Hearing this, the Delphians then took thought for themselves. They sent their children and women across to Achaia, while the majority of the men went up to the peaks of Parnassus and carried their belongings to the Corycian cave; and some went to Amphissa in Locris. Thus, all the Delphians abandoned the city, except for sixty men and the prophet.
As the barbarians were approaching nearby and the sanctuary was in sight, at that moment the prophet, whose name was Aceratus, saw sacred weapons lying before the temple, having been brought out from within the inner chamber, which it was not lawful for any human to touch. He indeed went to the Delphians who were present, signifying the portent; and when the barbarians were pressing on towards the sanctuary of Athena Pronaia, even greater portents than the previous one occurred to them. For indeed, this marvel is very great, that the weapons of war appeared lying outside the temple on their own; but the second things that happened, surpassing all marvels, are most worthy of wonder. For when the barbarians were advancing towards the sanctuary of Athena Pronaia, at that moment, lightning bolts fell upon them from the sky, and from Parnassus two peaks broke off and were carried with a great crash upon them, crushing many of them; and from the sanctuary of Athena Pronaia, a shout and a cry of victory arose.
And when all these things were mixed together, fear had fallen upon the barbarians. And the Delphians, having learned that they were fleeing, went down and killed a great number of them. And those who were left fled straight to Boeotia. And these barbarians who had escaped, as I learn, said that in addition to these things, they also saw other divine sights: for they claimed that two warriors, larger than according to human nature, followed them, killing and pursuing.
These two, the Delphians say, are their native heroes, Phylacus and Autonous, whose sanctuaries are around the temple, Phylacus' indeed by the very road below the temple of Pronaia, and Autonous' near the Castalian spring under the Hyampeian peak. And the stones that fell from Parnassus were still visible even in my time, lying in the precinct of Pronaia Athena, carried there by the barbarians as they were driven through. Now, this is the account of how these men were repelled from the temple.
The naval force of the Greeks, at the request of the Athenians, moved from Artemisium and held their ships at Salamis. The Athenians asked them to hold at Salamis for these reasons: so that they themselves might bring out their children and women from Attica, and also that they might take counsel about what they should do. For they were about to take counsel on the basis of the present state of affairs, as their plans had been proven false. For they thought they would find the Peloponnesians gathered together in Boeotia to oppose the barbarian, but they found none of this to be true. Instead, they learned that they were fortifying the Isthmus, as if they cared most about protecting the Peloponnese and keeping it safe, while letting everything else go. Learning this, they thus asked them to hold at Salamis.
The others indeed arrived at Salamis, while the Athenians went to their own land. After their arrival, they made a proclamation that each Athenian should save their children and servants in whatever way they could. At this point, most sent them to Troezen, some to Aegina, and some to Salamis. They hastened to do these things, wishing to obey the oracle and also for this reason, not least of all. The Athenians say that a great snake lives as a guardian of the acropolis, dwelling in the temple; they say this and indeed, as if it were true, they set out monthly offerings; the monthly offerings are honey-cakes. This honey-cake, which had always been consumed in the past, was then untouched. When the priestess signified these things, the Athenians even more so and more eagerly left the city, as if the goddess had also abandoned the acropolis. When everything was prepared for them, they sailed to the camp.
When the ships from Artemisium reached Salamis, the rest of the Greek naval force, having learned about it, gathered from Troezen; for they had been ordered to assemble at Pogon, the harbor of the Troezenians. Indeed, many more ships were gathered than those that had fought at Artemisium, and from more cities. Now, the admiral was the same as at Artemisium, Eurybiades, son of Euryclides, a Spartan man, but not of royal lineage. The Athenians, however, provided the greatest number of ships and the best sailing ones.
The following forces were arrayed: from the Peloponnese, the Lacedaemonians provided sixteen ships; the Corinthians, the same number as at Artemisium; the Sicyonians, fifteen ships; the Epidaurians, ten; the Troezenians, five; and the Hermioneans, three. These people, except for the Hermioneans, were of Dorian and Macedonian stock, having their origin from Erineus, Pindus, and the Dryopian region. The Hermioneans, however, were Dryopians, who had been expelled from the land now called Doris by Herakles and the Malians.
These, then, of the Peloponnesians were arrayed for war, and those from the outer mainland: the Athenians, indeed, providing ships for all the others, one hundred and eighty, alone: for in Salamis, the Plataeans did not fight alongside the Athenians due to such a matter: as the Greeks were departing from Artemisium, when they came to Chalcis, the Plataeans disembarking turned to the opposite shore of Boeotia for the removal of their household. These, then, saving these, were left behind. The Athenians, however, when the Pelasgians held the now-called Hellas, were Pelasgians, being called Cranai, and when Cecrops was king, they were called Cecropidae, and when Erechtheus received the rule, they were renamed Athenians, and when Ion, son of Xuthus, became the general of the Athenians, they were called Ionians after him.
The Megarians indeed provided the same complement as at Artemisium, and the Ampraciots, having seven ships, came to their aid, while the Leucadians, being a Dorian people from Corinth, contributed three ships.
Of the islanders, the Aeginetans provided thirty ships. They indeed had other manned ships, but with these they guarded their own land, and with the thirty best sailing ones they fought in the naval battle at Salamis. The Aeginetans are Dorians from Epidaurus, and the island's former name was Oenone. After the Aeginetans, the Chalcidians provided the same twenty ships as at Artemisium, and the Eretrians the seven; these are Ionians. After them, the Ceans provided the same ships, being an Ionian nation from Athens. The Naxians provided four ships, having been sent to the Medes by their fellow citizens like the other islanders, but disregarding the orders, they arrived at the Greeks, urged by Democritus, a respected man of the citizens and then a trierarch. The Naxians are Ionians who have come from Athens. The Styrians provided the same ships as at Artemisium, and the Cythnians one and a fifty-oared ship, both of these being Dryopians. And the Seriphians, Siphnians, and Melians were campaigning; for these alone of the islanders did not give land and water to the barbarian.
All these people, dwelling within Thesprotia and the river Acheron, were engaged in the war. For the Thesprotians are neighbors to the Ampraciots and Leucadians, who campaigned from the farthest regions. Of those living outside these areas, the Crotonians alone were the ones who helped Greece in its danger with one ship, which was commanded by a man, a three-time Pythian victor, Phayllus. The Crotonians are indeed of Achaean stock.
Now, the others providing triremes were campaigning, but the Melians, Siphnians, and Seriphians provided fifty-oared boats: the Melians, being of Lacedaemonian origin, provided two, while the Siphnians and Seriphians, being Ionians from Athens, provided one each. The total number of ships, excluding the fifty-oared boats, was three hundred and seventy-eight.
When the generals from the aforementioned cities came together at Salamis, they deliberated, with Eurybiades proposing that each person should express their opinion on where it seemed most advantageous to engage in a naval battle, given that they themselves were in control of these regions: for Attica was already abandoned, and he put forth the remaining places for consideration. The opinions of the speakers mostly converged on the idea of sailing to the Isthmus and fighting a naval battle in front of the Peloponnese, putting forth this argument: that if they were defeated in the naval battle while at Salamis, they would be besieged on an island where no retribution would be apparent to them, but if they were at the Isthmus, they would be able to retreat to their own lands.
While these matters were being discussed by the generals from the Peloponnese, a man from Athens had come, announcing that the barbarian had arrived in Attica and that all of it was being set on fire. For the army, turning through Boeotia with Xerxes, having set fire to the city of the Thespians, they themselves having left for the Peloponnese, and likewise that of the Plataeans, had come to Athens and was laying waste to everything there. And he set fire to both Thespiae and Plataea, having learned from the Thebans that they were not siding with the Medes.
From the crossing of the Hellespont, the barbarians began their journey, having spent one month there as they crossed into Europe, and in three other months, they arrived in Attica, with Calliades being the leader of the Athenians. And they captured the city, which was deserted, and they found a few of the Athenians in the sacred area, both the caretakers of the sanctuary and poor people, who, having barricaded the acropolis with doors and logs, defended themselves against the attackers, both because they did not leave for Salamis due to the weakness of their lives, and because they themselves thought they had discovered the oracle that the Pythia had given them, that the wooden wall would be indestructible: this very thing was the refuge according to the oracle, and not the ships.
The Persians, sitting on the opposite hill of the Acropolis, which the Athenians call the Areopagus, besieged in such a manner: wrapping their arrows in flammable material, they shot them at the barricade. There, the besieged Athenians defended themselves, even though they were driven to the utmost distress and the barricade had been betrayed. They did not accept the terms offered by the Pisistratids concerning surrender, but instead, they devised other defenses and even sent large rolling stones against the barbarians who approached the gates, so that Xerxes was puzzled for a long time, unable to capture them.
In time, indeed, an exit appeared for the barbarians from their difficulties, for it was necessary according to the oracle that all of Attica on the mainland should be under the Persians. So, in front of the Acropolis, behind the gates and the ascent, where no one guarded nor would anyone have hoped that any man would ever climb up there, some men climbed up by the sanctuary of Cecrops' daughter, Aglauros, although the place was a sheer cliff. When the Athenians saw them having climbed up to the Acropolis, some threw themselves down from the wall and were destroyed, while others fled into the inner chamber. And the Persians who had climbed up first turned towards the gates, and having opened them, they killed the suppliants. And when all had been laid low for them, having plundered the sanctuary, they set fire to the entire Acropolis.
Having completely captured Athens, Xerxes sent a horseman to Susa to announce to Artabanus the good fortune that had befallen them. And on the second day after sending the messenger, he summoned the Athenian exiles who were following him, and ordered them to go up to the Acropolis and perform their sacred rites in their own way, whether indeed he was giving these orders because he had seen some vision in a dream, or whether it had occurred to him after he had set fire to the sanctuary. And the Athenian exiles did as they were commanded.
For the sake of this, I shall recount. There is in this acropolis a temple of Erechtheus, who is said to be Earthborn, in which there is an olive tree and a sea, which, according to the story from the Athenians, Poseidon and Athena set as witnesses when they competed for the land. This olive tree, then, along with the other sanctuary, was seized to be burned by the barbarians; but on the second day from the burning, the Athenians, who were ordered by the king to perform sacrifices, went up to the sanctuary and saw a shoot from the stump, having grown up as much as a cubit. These, then, reported these things.
And the Greeks in Salamis, when it was announced to them that the situation concerning the Athenian acropolis had been seized, they came to such a commotion that some of the generals did not even wait for the matter at hand to be decided, but they rushed into their ships and raised their sails as if they were going to depart. And for those who remained, it was decided to fight a naval battle before the Isthmus. Night came, and those who had dispersed from the assembly boarded their ships.
Upon Themistocles' arrival at the ship, Mnesiphilus, an Athenian man, asked him what had been decided for them. And when he learned from him that it had been resolved to sail the ships to the Isthmus and to fight a naval battle before the Peloponnese, he said, "Indeed, if they withdraw the ships from Salamis, you will no longer fight for any single homeland: for each will turn to their own city, and neither will Eurybiades be able to hold them back nor any other man, so as not to scatter the army. And Greece will be destroyed by ill counsels. But if there is any device, go and try to dissolve the decision, if somehow you can persuade Eurybiades to change his mind so as to stay here."
Themistocles was greatly pleased with this advice, and without responding to it, he went to the ship of Eurybiades. Upon arriving, he said he wanted to discuss a matter of common interest; Eurybiades then ordered him to board the ship and speak if he wished. At this point, Themistocles, sitting beside him, recounted all that he had heard from Mnesiphilus, making it seem as if it were his own idea, and adding many other things as well, until he persuaded Eurybiades to disembark from the ship and gather the generals for a council meeting.
But when they had gathered together, before Eurybiades could put forth the reason for which he had assembled the generals, Themistocles was greatly engaged in the discussion, as if he were in great need. As he was speaking, the Corinthian general Adeimantus, son of Ocytus, said, "O Themistocles, in the contests, those who start before the signal are beaten with rods." And he, replying, said, "But indeed, those who are left behind do not win crowns."
Then Themistocles calmly responded to the Corinthian, and to Eurybiades he did not say anything of the earlier arguments, that when they withdraw from Salamis they will scatter; for with the allies present, it did not suit him to bring any charge. But he held to another argument, saying these things: "In you now lies the power to save Greece, if you listen to me and stay here to fight, and do not, persuaded by these words, move the ships to the Isthmus. For consider each option after hearing both. If you fight at the Isthmus, you will fight in the open sea, which is least advantageous to us, as we have heavier ships and fewer in number; and you will lose Salamis, Megara, and Aegina, even if we are successful in other things. And with their fleet, their land army will follow, and thus you will lead them to the Peloponnese, putting all of Greece at risk." "But if you do what I say, you will find these good things in it: first, by fighting with few ships against many in the narrow strait, if the outcome of the war is as expected, we will have a great victory; for fighting in a narrow space is to our advantage, while in a wide area it is to theirs. Again, Salamis will be saved, where our children and women lie for protection. And this too is in it, which you should especially consider: by staying here, you will fight for the Peloponnese just as much as at the Isthmus, and you will not lead them to the Peloponnese if you think rightly." "And if what I hope happens and we win with the ships, the barbarians will not come to the Isthmus nor advance further than Attica, and they will leave with no order, and we will gain an advantage by keeping Megara, Aegina, and Salamis safe, where it is prophesied for us that the enemies will be defeated from above. Now, when people plan reasonably, things usually turn out as they wish; but when they plan unreasonably, not even the gods are willing to join in with human opinions."
While Themistocles was speaking, Adeimantus the Corinthian again attacked him, telling him to be silent since he had no city, and not allowing Eurybiades to cast his vote for a man without a city. For he said that Themistocles, offering his advice in this way, had a city that was captured and occupied, referring to Athens. Then indeed, Themistocles spoke many harsh words against him and the Corinthians, making it clear in his speech that they too had a city and land greater than theirs, as long as they had two hundred fully-crewed ships. For he said that no Greeks would be able to repel them if they were to attack.
And signifying these things in his speech, he turned to Eurybiades, speaking more urgently. "If you remain here and stay, you will be a good man; but if not, you will overthrow Greece, for our entire war effort depends on the ships. So, be persuaded by me. And if you do not do these things, we, taking our household servants as we have them, will move to Siris in Italy, which is ours from long ago, and the prophecies say that it must be founded by us. But you, deprived of such allies, will remember my words."
While Themistocles was speaking these things, Eurybiades was persuaded to change his mind. It seems to me that he was most afraid that the Athenians would leave them if he led the ships to the Isthmus. For without the Athenians, the remaining forces would no longer be able to fight effectively. Thus, Eurybiades decided to stay and engage in a naval battle.
Thus indeed, those around Salamis, having come to a decision by words, after it seemed good to Eurybiades, prepared themselves there as if they would fight a naval battle. And a day came to be, and at the same time as the sun was rising, there was an earthquake both on the land and in the sea. And it seemed good to them to make a vow to the gods and to call upon the sons of Aeacus as allies. And as it seemed good to them, they also did these things: having made a vow to all the gods, they called upon Ajax and Telamon from Salamis itself, and they sent a ship to Aegina for Aeacus and the other sons of Aeacus.
Dicaeus, son of Theocydes, an Athenian man who was an exile and had become influential among the Medes at that time, said that when the land of Attica was being laid waste by the infantry army of Xerxes and was deserted by the Athenians, he happened to be with Demaratus, the Lacedaemonian, in the Thriasian plain, and saw a cloud of dust advancing from Eleusis, as if made by about thirty thousand men; and they both wondered who the men could be that were making the dust, and then they heard a cry, and it seemed to him that the cry was the mystic "Iacchus." Demaratus, being ignorant of the sacred rites performed at Eleusis, asked him what this cry might be. And he said, "Demaratus, there is no way that some great disaster will not befall the king's army; for it is quite clear, since Attica is deserted, that this cry is divine, coming from Eleusis to bring vengeance upon the Athenians and their allies. And if it descends upon the Peloponnese, there will be danger for the king himself and his army on the mainland; but if it turns towards the ships at Salamis, the king's naval force will be in peril. This festival is celebrated by the Athenians every year in honor of the Mother and the Maiden, and any Athenian or other Greek who wishes may be initiated: and the cry which you hear in this festival is the 'Iacchus'." In response to this, Demaratus said, "Be silent, and do not tell this story to anyone else; for if these words are reported to the king, you will lose your head, and neither I nor anyone else among men will be able to save you. But keep quiet, and leave the care of this army to the gods." So he advised him, and from the dust and the cry a cloud arose and, being lifted up, was carried towards Salamis, to the camp of the Greeks. Thus they learned that the naval force of Xerxes was about to be destroyed. Dicaeus, son of Theocydes, used to tell this story, appealing to Demaratus and other witnesses.
But those who were assigned to Xerxes' naval force, having seen the disaster in Laconia at Thermopylae, crossed from Trachis to Histiaea. Waiting for three days, they sailed through the Euripus channel, and in three more days, they arrived at Phalerum. In my opinion, being no less in number, they attacked Athens, both by land and by sea, than those who came to Sepias and Thermopylae. For I will set against those who were destroyed by the storm and those at Thermopylae and the naval battles at Artemisium, these who were not yet following the king: the Melians, Dorians, Locrians, and all the Boeotian forces except the Thespians and Plataeans; and indeed the Carystians, Andrians, Teneans, and all the other islanders, except the five cities whose names we mentioned earlier. For indeed, the further the Persians advanced into Greece, the more nations followed them.
So when all these arrived at Athens, except for the Parians (for the Parians were left behind in Cythnus, watching where the war would turn out), the rest, as they arrived at Phalerum, there Xerxes himself went down to the ships, wishing to join them and learn the opinions of those sailing. And when he arrived, the rulers of their own nations and the commanders from the ships were summoned, and they sat as the king had given honor to each, first the king of Sidon, then the king of Tyre, and after the others. And as they sat in order, Xerxes sent Mardonius to inquire, testing each if they should engage in a sea battle.
And when Mardonius went around asking, beginning with the Sidonian, the others all expressed the same opinion, urging to engage in a sea battle, but Artemisia said the following: "Tell the king, Mardonius, that I say these things, neither having been the worst in the sea battles off Euboea nor having achieved the least. Master, it is right for me to show my opinion, as I happen to think the best for your affairs. And so I say this: spare your ships and do not engage in a sea battle. For your men are so much better than your men at sea as men are than women. Why then do you need to risk a sea battle? You do not have Athens, for which you set out to wage war, and you have the rest of Greece; no one stands in your way: those who opposed you have been punished as was fitting for them." "And I think that the affairs of your enemies will turn out as I will say. If you do not rush to engage in a sea battle, but keep your ships here, staying close to land or even advancing into the Peloponnese, it will easily go as you intend, Master. For the Greeks are not able to resist you for a long time, but you will scatter them, and each will flee to their own city. For there is no food for them on this island, as I learn, nor a home for them if you drive your land army into the Peloponnese; those who have come from there will not remain unshaken, nor will they care to fight at sea for the Athenians." "But if you rush to engage in a sea battle right away, I fear that the naval force, having been harmed, may also harm the land army. And, O king, also consider this in your heart, that bad slaves are fond of becoming good for good men, and good for bad men. And you, being the best of all men, have bad slaves who are said to be allies, being Egyptians and Cyprians and Cilicians and Pamphylians, of whom there is no benefit at all."
When Artemisia spoke these things to Mardonius, those who were well-disposed towards her were troubled by her words, thinking that she would suffer some misfortune from the king because she did not allow a sea battle to take place. But those who were hostile and envious of her, being honored among all the allies, took pleasure in the inquiry, thinking that she would be destroyed. However, when the opinions were reported to Xerxes, he was very pleased with Artemisia's opinion, and considering her to be even more prudent than before, he praised her much more. Nevertheless, he ordered to be persuaded by the majority, having this belief: that they had willingly done badly at Euboea since he was not present, but now he himself was prepared to witness them fighting in a sea battle.
When the command to sail was given, they directed their ships towards Salamis and were arranged in order quietly. At that time, indeed, the day did not allow them to engage in a sea battle, for night had come; but they were preparing for the following day. The Greeks were filled with both fear and dread, not least those from the Peloponnese: they were afraid because they themselves, being stationed in Salamis, were about to fight a naval battle for the land of the Athenians, and if they were defeated, they would be captured on an island and besieged, having left their own land unguarded. Meanwhile, the barbarians' infantry was advancing under the cover of the present night towards the Peloponnese.
And yet, they had devised every possible means to prevent the barbarians from invading by land. For as soon as the Peloponnesians learned that those with Leonidas at Thermopylae had perished, they quickly assembled from their cities and took their position at the Isthmus, and their general was Cleombrotus, son of Anaxandrides and brother of Leonidas. As they were stationed at the Isthmus and had destroyed the Scironian road, they then decided, as it seemed best to them, to build a wall across the Isthmus. Since there were many tens of thousands and every man was working, the work progressed; for stones, bricks, logs, and baskets full of sand were brought in, and those who had come to help worked without any break, neither by night nor by day.
The Greeks who had come to help at the Isthmus were these: the Lacedaemonians, all the Arcadians, Eleans, Corinthians, Epidaurians, Phliasians, Troezenians, and Hermioneans. These were the ones who had come to help and were greatly concerned for the endangered Greece; but for the other Peloponnesians, they cared for nothing. The Olympian and Carnean festivals had already passed by.
Seven tribes inhabit the Peloponnese. Of these, two are native and have always lived there, the Arcadians and the Cynurians; one tribe, the Achaeans, has not left the Peloponnese but has moved from its original land to another area; the remaining four tribes of the seven are immigrants, namely the Dorians, Aetolians, Dryopians, and Lemnians. The Dorians have many famous cities, the Aetolians have only Elis, the Dryopians have Hermione and Asine near Laconian Cardamyle, and the Lemnians have all the Paroreatae. The Cynurians, being native, are thought to be the only Ionians, but they have been Dorianized by the Argives and by time, being Orneatae and the perioikoi. Of these seven tribes, the remaining cities, apart from those I have mentioned, stayed neutral; but if it is permissible to speak freely, by staying neutral, they sided with the Medes.
The ones indeed at the Isthmus were engaged in such labor, as they were running for everything and not expecting the ships to be successful: but those in Salamis, learning these things, were afraid, not so much fearing for themselves as for the Peloponnese. At first, indeed, each of them standing by another man made a silent speech, making a wonder of Eurybiades' lack of counsel: but finally, it burst into the open. And indeed, a gathering took place and many of the same things were said, some arguing that it was necessary to sail away to the Peloponnese and risk fighting for that land, not staying to fight for a land already captured by the spear, while the Athenians, Aeginetans, and Megarians insisted on staying there and defending themselves.
When Themistocles saw that his opinion was opposed by the Peloponnesians, he secretly left the assembly and sent a man named Sicinnus to the camp of the Medes with a message. Sicinnus was a servant of Themistocles and a tutor to his children. Later, Themistocles made him a citizen of Thespiae, as the Thespians accepted new citizens, and he became wealthy. Arriving by boat, Sicinnus spoke to the barbarian generals, saying, "The Athenian general sent me secretly, without the knowledge of the other Greeks (for he happens to support the king's cause and prefers your affairs to prosper rather than those of the Greeks), to inform you that the Greeks are planning to flee in fear, and now is the best opportunity for you to accomplish all your tasks if you do not let them escape. For they do not agree with one another, nor will they stand against you; instead, you will see them fighting amongst themselves, those who support your cause and those who do not."
Having signaled these things to them, he departed: and as the message seemed trustworthy to them, they first disembarked many of the Persians onto the islet called Psyttalea, which lies between Salamis and the mainland. Then, when it was the middle of the night, they moved the western wing in a circle towards Salamis, and those who were stationed around Ceos and Cynosura also set sail, occupying the entire strait up to Munychia with their ships. They moved their ships for this reason: so that it would not be possible for the Greeks to even flee, but being caught in Salamis, they would pay the penalty for the contests at Artemisium. And they disembarked the Persians onto the islet called Psyttalea for this reason: so that when the naval battle took place, most of the men and the shipwrecks would be carried there (for the island lay in the path of the upcoming battle), in order that they might save some and destroy others. They carried out these things in silence, so that the enemies would not find out. Indeed, they prepared these things during the night, not sleeping at all.
But I cannot argue against the oracles that they are not true, not wanting to try to overthrow them when they speak clearly, looking at such matters. "But when they bridge the sacred shore of golden-sworded Artemis with ships and the sea-dwelling Cynosura with raging hope, having destroyed shining Athens, divine justice will extinguish strong insolence, the son of arrogance, terribly raging, seeming to consume everything." "For bronze will mix with bronze, and Ares will stain the sea with blood. Then the wide-seeing son of Cronus brings the day of freedom for Greece and the revered Victory." In such things and so clearly speaking, I dare not say anything against Bacis concerning oracles, nor do I accept it from others.
At Salamis, there was much contention among the generals. They did not yet know that they were being encircled by the barbarian ships, but rather, as if they were arranged according to the hours of the day, they believed they were in their respective places.
While the generals were gathered, Aristides, the son of Lysimachus, crossed over from Aegina, a man who was Athenian but had been ostracized by the people; I have considered, inquiring about his character, that he became the best and most just man in Athens. This man, standing in the council, called out Themistocles, who was not a friend to himself but rather an enemy to the greatest extent; but, making forgetfulness of those things due to the greatness of the present evils, he called him out, wishing to confer with him; for he had heard beforehand that those from the Peloponnese were eager to lead the ships towards the Isthmus. And when Themistocles came out to him, Aristides spoke these things: "It is necessary for us to quarrel both at other times and indeed now also about which of us will do more good for our fatherland. But I tell you that it is equal to say many and few things about the departure from here for the Peloponnesians. For I, having become an eyewitness, tell you that now neither the Corinthians nor Eurybiades himself will be able to sail out even if they wish to; for we are encircled by the enemy ships. But go in and indicate these things to them." And he answered with these words.
Themistocles responded, "You indeed give excellent encouragement, and you have brought good news; for I was desiring these things to happen, and you, having become an eyewitness, have come. Know from me the deeds done by the Medes: for it was necessary, when the Greeks were unwilling to enter into battle, to force them against their will. But since you have come bringing good news, announce it to them yourself. For if I say these things, I will seem to be speaking falsely and will not persuade them, as if the barbarians are not doing these things. But go in yourself and show them how it is. And when you have shown them, if they are persuaded, these things will indeed be the best; but if they do not become trustworthy to them, it will be the same for us: for they will no longer be able to flee, if indeed we are surrounded on all sides, as you say."
At that point, Aristides came in and spoke, saying that he had arrived from Aegina and had barely managed to sail out, evading those who were attacking; for the entire Greek camp was surrounded by the ships of Xerxes. He advised them to prepare themselves as if they were going to defend. And having said these things, he stepped aside, but then again, a dispute arose among the generals; for the majority of the strategists did not believe the news that had been reported.
But as they were disbelieving these things, a trireme of Tenian men arrived, having deserted, of which a man named Panaetius, son of Sosimenes, was in command, and indeed it brought the entire truth. And because of this deed, the Tenians were inscribed at Delphi on the tripod among those who had defeated the barbarian. So then, with this ship that had deserted to Salamis and the Lemnian ship that had deserted earlier at Artemisium, the naval force of the Greeks was filled up to the three hundred and eighty ships; for indeed they were short of two ships at that time for the number.
But when the Greeks indeed believed the words of the Tenians, they prepared themselves as if they were going to fight a naval battle. As dawn was breaking and they were holding a gathering of the soldiers, Themistocles spoke well among all, and his words were all set against the lesser ones, as much as indeed happens in human nature and situation: having advised them to choose the better of these and having concluded his speech, he ordered them to embark on the ships. And indeed, they were embarking, and the trireme from Aegina arrived, which had gone to fetch the sons of Aeacus.
Then the Greeks set sail with all their ships, and as they were setting out, the barbarians immediately pursued them. Indeed, the other Greeks were backing their ships towards the stern and were trying to beach them, but Ameinias, an Athenian man from Pallene, having been driven out, charged with his ship. And when the ship got entangled and they were unable to disengage, in this way, the others, helping Ameinias, joined the battle. The Athenians say that the beginning of the sea battle happened in this way, but the Aeginetans say that the one which had gone to Aegina to fetch the sons of Aeacus, this one was the one that started it. And it is also said that a phantom of a woman appeared to them, and having appeared, she urged them on so that the entire Greek camp could hear, first reproaching them with these words, "Oh you madmen, until when will you still keep backing your ships towards the stern?"
Against the Athenians, indeed, the Phoenicians were arrayed (for they held the wing towards Eleusis and the west), and against the Lacedaemonians, the Ionians held the wing towards the dawn and Piraeus. However, few of them willingly fought poorly according to the instructions of Themistocles, but most did not. Now, I can list many names of trierarchs who captured Greek ships, but I will use none except Theomestor, son of Androdamas, and Phylacus, son of Histiaeus, both of Samos. I remember these two alone for this reason: that Theomestor, on account of this deed, ruled Samos, having been established by the Persians, and Phylacus was inscribed as a benefactor of the king and was gifted with much land. The benefactors of the king are called "orosangae" in the Persian language.
Now concerning these matters, thus it was: the multitude of the ships in Salamis were being destroyed, some by the Athenians and some by the Aeginetans. For as the Greeks were fighting in naval battle with order and in formation, the barbarians were doing nothing with arrangement or with purpose. It was bound to happen to them such as it turned out. And yet, they were and became on that day much better than themselves at Euboea, each one being eager and fearing Xerxes, and each one thought that the king was watching himself.
Concerning the others, indeed, I am not able to say with certainty how each of the barbarians or Greeks fought; but concerning Artemisia, these things happened, from which she gained even more favor with the king. For when the king's affairs were in great confusion, at this time the ship of Artemisia was being pursued by an Attic ship; and she, not having a way to escape, for in front of her were other friendly ships, and her own ship happened to be closest to the enemies, it seemed to her to do this, which also turned out to be advantageous for her. For being pursued by the Attic ship, she attacked and sank a friendly ship with a crew of Calyndians and their king Damasithymus himself sailing on it. Whether there was some quarrel with him while they were still at the Hellespont, I am not able to say, nor whether she did these things deliberately, nor whether the ship of the Calyndians happened to fall in her way by chance. But when she attacked and sank it, having used good fortune, she accomplished two good things for herself. For the captain of the Attic ship, seeing her attacking a ship with a barbarian crew, thought that Artemisia's ship was either Greek or had deserted from the barbarians and was defending them, so he turned away and went towards other ships.
This indeed happened to her in such a way that she managed to escape and not be destroyed, and from these things, having done evil, she gained even more favor with Xerxes. For it is said that the king, watching, learned of the ship attacking, and indeed someone of those present said, "Master, do you see Artemisia how well she fights and has sunk a ship of the enemies?" And he tried to find out if it was truly the deed of Artemisia, and those said, clearly recognizing the distinguishing mark of the ship: but the destroyed one they believed to be an enemy. For indeed the other things, as has been said, happened to her bringing good fortune, and also that no one from the ship of the Calyndians survived to become an accuser. And Xerxes is said to have said in response to the things being reported, "My men have become women, and my women men." These things indeed they say Xerxes said.
In this struggle, indeed, the general Ariabignes, son of Darius and brother of Xerxes, died, and from it many other famous Persians and Medes and of the other allies, but only a few Greeks: for being skilled in swimming, those whose ships were destroyed, and not being killed in the hands of the enemy, swam to Salamis. But many of the barbarians perished in the sea, not knowing how to swim. And when the first ones turned to flight, in that place most of the ships were destroyed: for those who were positioned behind, attempting to pass to the front with their ships as if to receive some work from the king, fell upon their own fleeing ships.
And this happened during that tumult: some of the Phoenicians, whose ships had been destroyed, went to the king and accused the Ionians, saying that it was because of them that the ships were lost, as if they were traitors. Thus, it so happened that the Ionian generals were not killed, and the Phoenicians who accused them received such a reward. While they were still saying these things, a Samothracian ship attacked an Attic ship. Indeed, the Attic ship was sinking, and an Aeginetan ship coming up sank the Samothracian ship. And since the Samothracians were javelin-throwers, they struck the fighters from the sinking ship and boarded and seized it. These events saved the Ionians: for when Xerxes saw them performing a great deed, he turned to the Phoenicians, being extremely upset and blaming everyone, and ordered their heads to be cut off, so that they themselves, being wicked, would not accuse those who were better. For whenever Xerxes saw any of his own men showing some deed in the naval battle, sitting under the mountain opposite Salamis called Aegaleos, he inquired about the doer, and the scribes wrote down the trierarch's name, his city, and his father's name. And even the presence of Ariaramnes, a Persian man and friend, added to this misfortune of the Phoenician. So, they turned against the Phoenicians.
As the barbarians turned to flee and sailed towards Phalerum, the Aeginetans, taking their stand in the strait, performed deeds worthy of mention. For the Athenians, in the midst of the turmoil, were attacking both the ships that resisted and those that fled, while the Aeginetans targeted those that were sailing out. And as some managed to escape the Athenians, they were carried into the hands of the Aeginetans.
At that point, the ships of Themistocles, pursuing a ship, and of Polycritus, son of Crios, an Aeginetan man, attacking a Sidonian ship, encountered each other. This Sidonian ship had captured the Aeginetan ship that was guarding near Sciathus, on which Pytheas, son of Ischenous, was sailing. The Persians, admiring him for his bravery, had kept him on the ship after cutting him down. Now, the Sidonian ship carrying Pytheas and the Persians was captured, so that Pytheas was saved and returned to Aegina. When Polycritus saw the Attic ship, he recognized the signal of the flagship and shouted at Themistocles, taunting him and reproaching him for the Aeginetans' siding with the Medes. Having attacked a ship, Polycritus threw these insults at Themistocles. The barbarians, whose ships had escaped, fled and arrived at Phalerum, under the protection of the land army.
In this naval battle, the Aeginetans were heard to be the best among the Greeks, and after them, the Athenians; of the men, Polycritus the Aeginetan and Athenians Eumenes the Anagyrian and Aminias the Pallenean, who also pursued Artemisia. If indeed he had learned that Artemisia was sailing in this ship, he would not have ceased before he either captured her or was himself captured. For the Athenian trierarchs had been instructed, and also a prize of ten thousand drachmas was laid down, for whoever took her alive: for they were greatly angered that a woman was waging war against Athens. This woman indeed, as has been said before, escaped; and there were also the others, whose ships had survived, in Phalerum.
The Athenians say that Adeimantus, the Corinthian general, immediately at the beginning, when the ships were mingling, being struck with terror and fear, raised the sails and fled, and the Corinthians, seeing their flagship fleeing, likewise fled. But as they were fleeing past the temple of Athena Sciras in Salamis, a boat came upon them by divine guidance, for no one appeared to have sent it, nor did any of those from the army offer it to the Corinthians. In this, they say, the matter was divine. For when the ships were near, those from the boat spoke these words: "Adeimantus, you, turning the ships to flight, have set off betraying the Greeks; but they, indeed, are winning as much as they themselves prayed for, having overcome their enemies." When these things were said, Adeimantus, not believing, spoke these words again, that they themselves would be able to be taken as hostages and die if the Greeks were not seen to be winning. Thus, indeed, having turned the ship around, he and the others came to the camp where the deed had been done. This story about them is held by the Athenians, but the Corinthians themselves do not agree, but they think that they themselves were among the first in the naval battle; and the rest of Greece bears witness to them.
Aristeides, the son of Lysimachus, an Athenian man, of whom I mentioned a little earlier as a most excellent man, this man during this tumult that occurred around Salamis did the following: having taken many of the hoplites who were stationed along the coast of the Salaminian land, being Athenians by birth, he disembarked, leading them to the island of Psyttalea, where they killed all the Persians who were on that island.
As the naval battle had been broken off, the Greeks, having towed to Salamis as many of the shipwrecks as happened to be there still, were ready for another naval battle, expecting that the king would still use his remaining ships. Many of the shipwrecks, having been taken up by the west wind, were carried to the shore of Attica called Colias. So that the oracle, both the other one concerning this naval battle spoken by Bacis and Musaeus, and indeed also the one concerning the shipwrecks carried here, spoken many years before these events in an oracle by Lysistratus, an Athenian man, a fortune-teller, which had escaped the notice of all the Greeks, "Colian women will cook with oars," was going to be after the king had left.
When Xerxes learned of the disaster that had occurred, he feared that either the Ionians might suggest to the Greeks, or they themselves might think of sailing to the Hellespont to break the bridges, and being caught in Europe, he would be in danger of perishing, so he planned to flee. However, he did not want to be obvious to either the Greeks or his own people, so he attempted to build a dike across to Salamis and connected Phoenician cargo ships, so that they would serve as both a bridge and a wall, and he prepared for war as if he was going to engage in another naval battle. All the others who saw him doing these things believed that he was fully prepared to stay and fight: but Mardonius, who was most experienced in his intentions, was not deceived by any of these things.
While Xerxes both did these things and sent a messenger to the Persians to report the present misfortune to them, of these messengers there is nothing mortal that arrives more quickly: thus this has been discovered by the Persians. For they say that as many days as the whole journey is, so many horses and men stand apart by a day's journey, each horse and man appointed; neither snow nor rain nor heat nor night prevents them from accomplishing the course that lies before them as quickly as possible. The first, indeed, having run, hands over the entrusted message to the second, and the second to the third; and from there it is passed on through others, one after another, just as among the Greeks the torch-bearing race which they perform for Hephaestus. This running of the horses the Persians call "angareion."
Indeed, the first message arriving in Susa, as Xerxes had captured Athens, so delighted the remaining Persians that they covered all the roads with myrtle branches and burned fragrant incense, and they themselves were in feasts and festivities. But the second message coming upon them so distressed them that they all tore their clothes, and they used unceasing cries and lamentations, putting the blame on Mardonius. The Persians did not do these things so much grieving for the ships as fearing for Xerxes himself.
And concerning the Persians, these things happened during the whole intervening time, until Xerxes himself arrived and put an end to it. Mardonius, seeing that Xerxes was making a great disaster from the sea battle, and suspecting that he himself was planning to flee from the Athenians, having thought to himself that he would give an account for having persuaded the king to wage war against Greece, and that it would be better for him to risk either conquering Greece or dying honorably while suspended for great deeds: however, his opinion inclined more towards conquering Greece. Having considered these things, he offered the following speech: "Master, do not grieve nor make any great disaster of this matter that has happened. For the contest that carries everything for us is not about wood, but about men and horses. And neither will any of those who now think they have achieved everything by defeating our ships dare to oppose you, nor will anyone from this mainland. Those who opposed us have already paid the penalty. If it seems good to you, let us immediately attempt the Peloponnese; if it seems good to wait, this too is available to do. Do not be disheartened, for there is no escape for the Greeks, not without giving an account of what they have done now and earlier, to be your slaves. Above all, do these things now; but if it has been decided by you to drive yourself away, leading the army away, I have another plan as well from these things. Do not make the Persians a laughingstock for the Greeks, O king. For nothing of the matters has been made clear to you in Persia, nor will you say from where we have become cowardly men. But if Phoenicians and Egyptians and Cyprians and Cilicians have become cowardly, this suffering does not pertain to the Persians. Therefore, since the Persians are not to blame, be persuaded by me: if it seems good to you not to remain, you yourself drive away to your own customs, leading away the greater part of the army, but it is necessary for me to deliver enslaved Greece to you, having chosen 300,000 from the army."
Upon hearing these things, Xerxes, as if relieved from troubles, both rejoiced and was pleased, and having consulted with Mardonius, he said that he would consider which of the two he would do. And as he was deliberating together with the Persians who were called upon, it seemed good to him to also summon Artemisia to the council, because previously she alone appeared to understand what should be done. But when Artemisia arrived, having dismissed the other Persian advisors and the guards, Xerxes spoke the following: "Mardonius advises me to stay here and attempt the Peloponnese, saying that neither the Persians nor the land army are responsible for any suffering, but that if they wish, they could have a chance to prove themselves. Therefore, he either advises me to do these things, or he himself is willing to choose 300,000 from the army and deliver enslaved Greece to me, while he orders me to drive away with the rest of the army to my own customs. So now, advise me, for you also gave good counsel concerning the sea battle that took place, not allowing it to be done, and now advise me which of the two I should do, having made a good decision."
While he was deliberating on these matters, she said the following: "O king, it is difficult indeed for one giving counsel to achieve the best outcome, yet in light of the present circumstances, it seems to me that you should send yourself back, and leave Mardonius here with the troops he desires, if indeed he is willing and undertakes to do these things. For if he accomplishes what he claims to desire and his plans proceed well, the achievement, my lord, will be yours, for it is your servants who have accomplished it. But if the outcome is contrary to Mardonius' expectations, there will be no great misfortune for you, as long as you and your affairs at home are safe. For if you and your household are safe, the Greeks will often have to run many races for their own lives. As for Mardonius, if he suffers any harm, it will be of no account, and the Greeks, even if they are victorious, will not truly win, having only defeated your servant. And you, for the sake of which you undertook this expedition, will depart having burned Athens."
Xerxes was indeed pleased with the advice of Artemisia, for it happened to coincide with what he himself was thinking. For even if all men and women had advised him to stay, it seems to me that he would not have remained, so greatly was he filled with fear. And having praised Artemisia, he sent her away to Ephesus to take care of his illegitimate sons who were with him.
And with his sons, Xerxes sent Hermotimus as a guardian, who was of Pedasa origin, and was held in high esteem among the eunuchs in the king's court. The Pedasians dwell above Halicarnassus, and in these Pedasians, such an event occurs: when something difficult is about to happen within a time for all those dwelling around this city, then the priestess of Athena there grows a large beard. And this had already happened to them twice.
From these Pedasians, indeed, Hermotimus was the one who had already taken the greatest revenge for the wrongs done to him of all those we know. For having been captured by enemies and being sold, he was bought by Panionius, a man from Chios, who established his livelihood from the most unholy deeds: for in order to acquire boys of beautiful appearance, he would cut off their genitals and sell them in Sardis and Ephesus for great sums of money. For among the barbarians, eunuchs are more valued because of the trustworthiness of all those who are castrated. And indeed, Panionius had castrated many others, making his livelihood from this, and also this Hermotimus. And indeed, not everything was unfortunate for Hermotimus, for he arrived from Sardis to the king along with other gifts, and as time went on, he was honored most of all the eunuchs by Xerxes.
As the Persian army was preparing, with the king in Sardis, to march against Athens, Hermotimus happened to go down to the land of Mysia, which is inhabited by Chians and called Atarneus, for some business, and there he found Panionius. Recognizing him, Hermotimus spoke to him with many friendly words, first recounting all the good things he had because of him, and secondly promising to do many good things for him in return if he would bring his household to that place, so that Panionius, gladly accepting the words, brought his children and wife. But when Hermotimus had him surrounded by his whole family, he said the following: "O man who has gained his livelihood from the most unholy deeds of all men, what evil did I or any of my ancestors do to you or any of yours, that you made me, instead of a man, to be nothing? You thought you could deceive the gods with what you contrived then: they, using a just law, led you who did unholy things into my hands, so that you cannot complain about the punishment that will come to you from me." And when he had reproached him with these things, Panionius was forced to cut off the genitals of his four sons, who were brought before him, and being forced, he did this; and after he had done this, the sons, being forced, cut off his. Thus, both the punishment and Hermotimus came upon Panionius.
After Xerxes entrusted his sons to Artemisia to be taken to Ephesus, he called Mardonius and ordered him to choose from the army whomever he wished, and to attempt to make his deeds match his words. That day went as far as this. During the night, however, the generals, at the command of the king, led the ships from Phalerum back to the Hellespont as quickly as each could, in order to protect the bridges for the king's journey. And when the barbarians were sailing near Zoster, for thin headlands stretch out from this mainland, they thought they were ships and fled for a long distance. But in time, learning that they were not ships but headlands, they gathered together and were carried on.
When day came, the Greeks, seeing the land army remaining in its position, hoped that the ships were also at Phalerum, and they thought they would have to fight a sea battle, preparing themselves as if to defend. But when they learned that the ships had departed, they immediately decided to pursue them. Now, they did not see Xerxes' naval force while pursuing them as far as Andros, but when they arrived at Andros, they held a council. Themistocles, indeed, was showing his opinion that they should turn through the islands and, pursuing the ships, sail straight to the Hellespont, breaking the bridges. Eurybiades, however, was putting forth the opposite opinion, saying that if they break the bridges, this would cause the greatest of all evils for Greece. For if the Persian were forced to stay in Europe, he would try not to be idle, as for the one who is idle, neither any progress in his affairs would be possible nor any supply would appear from behind, and his army would be destroyed by famine; but if he himself undertakes and holds on to the work, everything in Europe would be likely to join him, city by city and nation by nation, either being captured or agreeing beforehand; and they would always have food for themselves from the annual produce of the Greeks. But he thought that the Persian, defeated in the sea battle, would not stay in Europe: therefore, they should let him flee, to wherever he would go, fleeing to his own land; and from there on, they should make the struggle concerning his land. This opinion was held by the other Peloponnesian generals as well.
When Themistocles realized that he could not persuade the majority to sail to the Hellespont, he turned to the Athenians (for they were the ones who were most upset about the Persians' escape and were willing to sail to the Hellespont and attack them, even if the others did not want to) and said these things to them: "I myself have already been present at many events and have heard much more about such things happening, where men who were threatened with necessity, having been defeated, fought back and regained their former wretchedness. But we, having found a solution for ourselves and for Greece, having driven away such a cloud of men, should not pursue men who are fleeing. For we did not accomplish these things, but the gods and heroes, who were envious of one man being the king of both Asia and Europe, a man who was impious and reckless: he who treated both the sacred and the private in the same way, burning and tearing down the statues of the gods; he who even whipped the sea and sent fetters down. But it is well for us in the present situation, staying in Greece for now, to take care of ourselves and our households, and let each one rebuild his house and have a necessary supply of seed, having completely driven away the barbarian. And at the same time, in the spring, let us sail to the Hellespont and Ionia." He said these things, intending to make a storehouse for himself with the Persian, so that if ever he was caught in any trouble with the Athenians, he might have a means of escape: and indeed, this is what happened.
Themistocles, indeed, spoke these things with the intention to deceive, and the Athenians were persuaded. For since he had appeared to be wise even before, being truly wise and well-advised, they were completely ready to be persuaded by his words. And when these things were agreed upon, immediately after this, Themistocles sent men with a ship, whom he trusted to be silent in every test, to tell the king what he himself had ordered: and among them, Sicinnus, the servant, was again present. When they arrived near Attica, some stayed on the ship, while Sicinnus, going up to Xerxes, said these things: "Themistocles, the son of Neocles, the general of the Athenians and the best and wisest man of all the allies, sent me to tell you that Themistocles the Athenian, wishing to serve you, has held back the Greeks who wanted to pursue your ships and break the bridges in the Hellespont. And now, enjoy much peace." Having signaled these things, they sailed back.
The Greeks, since it seemed best to them neither to pursue further the ships of the barbarians nor to sail to the Hellespont to break the passage, desired to encircle and take the island of Andros. For the Andrians, being the first of the islanders to be asked for money by Themistocles, did not give it, but with Themistocles putting forth this argument, that the Athenians had come concerning themselves, having two great gods, Persuasion and Necessity, and thus they must give much money, they responded to these things, saying that it was reasonable that Athens was great and prosperous, which had come with good gods, since the Andrians were exceedingly lacking in land and had two useless gods who did not leave their island but always loved to dwell there, Poverty and Helplessness, and being under the control of these gods, the Andrians would not give money: for the power of Athens could never be stronger than their own inability.
These, indeed, answering thus and not giving the money, were besieged. But Themistocles, for he did not cease to be greedy, sent threatening words to the other islands through the same messengers, asking for money and using the same arguments he had used with the king, saying that if they did not give what was demanded, he would bring the army of the Greeks and, besieging, would take them away. Saying these things, he collected large sums of money from the Carystians and the Parians, who, learning that Andros was besieged because it sided with the Persians, and that Themistocles was held in the highest esteem among the generals, sent money out of fear. And if indeed some other islanders also gave, I do not have it to say, but I think that some others also gave, and not only these. And yet, for the Carystians, there was no excess of evil on account of this; but the Parians, having appeased Themistocles with money, escaped the army. Now, Themistocles, setting out from Andros, secretly from the other generals, exacted money from the islanders.
After the naval battle, those around Xerxes, having waited a few days, marched back to Boeotia by the same road. For Mardonius thought it best both to send the king away and that it was not the right time of the year to wage war, and that it was better to spend the winter in Thessaly, and then to attempt the Peloponnese in the spring. But when they arrived in Thessaly, there Mardonius selected first all the Persians called Immortals, except for Hydarnes the general (for he said he would not leave the king), and then the other Persians who wore cuirasses and the thousand horsemen, and Medes and Sacae and Bactrians and Indians, both the infantry and the rest of the cavalry. He chose entire nations, and from the other allies he selected a few, to whom he had knowledge of their choosing and if he knew any good thing done by them. But one nation he chose most of all, the Persians, men wearing torques and bracelets, and then the Medes: these were not fewer in number than the Persians, but weaker in strength. So that in total, there were three hundred thousand men, including the horsemen.
In this time, while Mardonius was selecting the army and Xerxes was in Thessaly, an oracle had come to the Lacedaemonians from Delphi, to ask Xerxes for justice for the murder of Leonidas and to accept what was given from him. So, the Spartans quickly sent a herald, who, when he found the entire army still in Thessaly, came into the presence of Xerxes and said these words: "O king of the Medes, the Lacedaemonians and the Heraclidae from Sparta ask you for justice for the murder, as you killed their king while he was defending Greece." And he, laughing and holding back for a long time, as Mardonius happened to be standing nearby, pointing to him, said, "Therefore, this Mardonius here will give them such justice as is fitting for them."
The messenger, having received the response, departed, while Xerxes himself, leaving Mardonius in Thessaly, proceeded quickly to the Hellespont. In forty-five days, he arrived at the crossing point, bringing with him almost no part of the army, so to speak. Wherever they went and among whatever people, they would seize the produce of the land and eat it. If they found no produce, they would take the grass that grew from the earth and strip the bark from the trees and pluck the leaves, eating them, just like domesticated and wild animals, leaving nothing behind. They did this out of hunger. Moreover, a plague and dysentery attacked the army along the way and destroyed it. Xerxes left behind those who were sick, ordering the cities, wherever he happened to be driving through, to care for and nourish them, some in Thessaly, some in Siris of Paeonia, and some in Macedonia. There, he also left the sacred chariot of Zeus, which he had not taken back when he was driving to Greece. The Paeonians, giving it to the Thracians, said that the horses had been stolen by the upper Thracians who lived around the sources of the Strymon River when Xerxes demanded it.
There, the king of the Bisaltae, a Thracian of the Crestonian land, performed a deed of great cruelty: he claimed that he was not willing to be a slave to Xerxes, but went up to the Rhodope mountain, and he forbade his sons to join the army against Greece. However, disregarding this, either due to some other desire or a longing to see the war, they joined the Persian army. When all six of them returned unharmed, their father gouged out their eyes for this reason.
And these men indeed received this punishment, but the Persians, as they were traveling from Thrace, arrived at the crossing point, and hastening, they crossed the Hellespont with their ships to Abydos; for they did not find the bridges still stretched out, but broken apart by a storm. And there, being held up, they obtained more food than they had on the way, and filling themselves without any order and changing their water, many of the remaining army died. And the rest, together with Xerxes, arrived at Sardis.
There is also another account being told, that when Xerxes, driving away from Athens, arrived at Eion on the Strymon, from there he no longer traveled by land, but entrusted the army to Hydarnes to lead to the Hellespont, and he himself, boarding a Phoenician ship, was carried to Asia. Sailing, he encountered a great Strymonian wind and wave. And indeed, since the ship was more heavily burdened, so that many Persians who were with Xerxes were on the deck, at that point, the king, falling into fear, asked the pilot, shouting if there is any salvation for them, and he said, "Master, there is none, unless some relief from these many passengers happens." And it is said that Xerxes, having heard these things, said, "Persian men, now let one of you take care of the king: for in you my salvation seems to lie." He indeed said this, and they, bowing, leaped out into the sea, and the ship, having been lightened, was thus indeed saved to Asia. As soon as Xerxes disembarked onto the land, he did this: because he saved the king's life, he presented the pilot with a golden crown, but because he destroyed many Persians, he cut off his head.
There is another account being told about Xerxes' return, which I do not find credible, neither in this particular incident concerning the Persians nor in any other aspect. For if indeed the pilot had spoken to Xerxes in such a manner, I cannot think of a single reason why the king would not have done the following: order the Persians who were on the deck, being of noble birth, to go down into the hollow part of the ship, and then throw an equal number of Phoenician rowers, who were present, into the sea. But rather, as it has been previously mentioned to me, Xerxes returned to Asia by land, accompanied by the rest of the army.
And indeed, there is great testimony to this: for it appears that Xerxes, upon arriving at Abdera during his return journey, established a guest-friendship with them and presented them with a golden sword and a tiara adorned with gold. And as the people of Abdera themselves say, which I do not find credible at all, it was here that he first loosened his belt while fleeing from the Athenians, as he was in a place of safety. Now, Abdera is situated closer to the Hellespont than to the Strymon and Eion, from where they claim he embarked on the ship.
But the Greeks, when they were not able to capture Andros, turned to Carystus and, having ravaged their land, they departed to Salamis. First, indeed, they took out offerings for the gods, both other things and three Phoenician triremes, one to be dedicated at the Isthmus, which indeed was still there even in my time, the second at Sunium, and the third at Salamis for Ajax himself. And after this, they divided the plunder and sent the offerings to Delphi, from which a statue was made, having a ship's figurehead in its hand, being twelve cubits in size; and this statue stood where the golden one of Alexander the Macedonian is.
Having sent the first-fruits to Delphi, the Greeks inquired of the god in common if he had received the offerings in full and was pleased with them. The god said that he had them from the other Greeks, but not from the Aeginetans, and he demanded from them the best of the sea battle at Salamis. The Aeginetans, upon learning this, dedicated golden stars, which stand on a bronze mast in the corner, closest to the bowl of Croesus.
After the division of the spoils, the Greeks sailed to the Isthmus to give a prize to the worthiest among the Greeks in this war. And when the generals arrived and distributed the votes at the altar of Poseidon, judging the first and second from all, there each one of them placed his vote for himself, each one thinking he was the best, but many agreed in judging Themistocles as second. So indeed they were tied, but Themistocles surpassed them by far in second places.
But the Greeks, not wanting to decide on these matters due to jealousy, each sailed away to their own lands without making a decision. Nevertheless, Themistocles was praised and considered to be by far the wisest man among the Greeks throughout all of Greece. And since he was not honored for his victory by those who fought in the naval battle at Salamis, he immediately went to Lacedaemon, wanting to be honored there. And the Lacedaemonians received him well and honored him greatly. Indeed, they gave the prize for valor, an olive wreath, to Eurybiades, and for wisdom and skill, they gave an olive wreath to Themistocles as well. They also gifted him with the finest chariot in Sparta. And after praising him greatly, they sent him on his way, accompanied by three hundred Spartan warriors, who are called Knights, as far as the borders of Tegea. This man alone, of all the people we know, was escorted by the Spartans in this manner.
When indeed he arrived from Lacedaemon to Athens, there Timodemus of Aphidnae, being one of the enemies of Themistocles, but otherwise not one of the distinguished men, filled with envy, reproached Themistocles, bringing up his arrival to Lacedaemon, saying that he held the honors from the Lacedaemonians for Athens, but not for himself. And he, since Timodemus did not stop saying these things, said, "It is so indeed: neither would I, being from Belbina, have been honored in such a way by the Spartans, nor would you, man, being an Athenian." Now these things indeed happened up to this point.
Artabazus, the son of Pharnaces, a man esteemed among the Persians and even more so after the events in Plataea, having chosen sixty thousand soldiers from the army of Mardonius, escorted the king as far as the passage to Asia. But when indeed he was in Asia, and he, returning, was near Pallene, as Mardonius was wintering in Thessaly and Macedonia and not at all being pressed to come to the other camp, he, not finding it just, enslaved the Potidaeans who had not revolted. For the Potidaeans, as the king had passed by and the naval force of the Persians had fled from Salamis, had revolted from the barbarians in the open. And so too had the others who inhabited Pallene.
At that time, indeed, Artabazus was besieging Potidaea, and suspecting also that the Olynthians were planning to revolt from the king, he besieged this city as well. The Bottiaeans, who had been driven out of the Thermaic Gulf by the Macedonians, were inhabiting it. And when he captured them by besieging, he led them out to a lake and slaughtered them, and he handed over the city to Critobulus of Torone to govern and to the Chalcidian people, and thus the Chalcidians held Olynthus.
After capturing Olynthus, Artabazus indeed quickly turned his attention to Potidaea. And to him paying attention, Timoxenus, the general of the Scionaeans, eagerly agreed to betray the city. In what manner the agreement was made, I indeed do not have to say (for it is not said), but the outcome was as follows: when either Timoxenus, wishing to send a message to Artabazus, or Artabazus to Timoxenus, they would wrap the letter around the shaft of an arrow, attach feathers to the letter, and shoot it to a prearranged location. Timoxenus, however, was discovered betraying Potidaea: for Artabazus, shooting to the prearranged location, missing this place, hit the shoulder of a man of Potidaea. And the man being struck, a crowd ran around, as is wont to happen in war, who immediately, taking the arrow and learning the letter, brought it to the generals; and there were also allies from Pallene. And to the generals, having read the letter and learned the cause of the betrayal, it seemed best not to expose Timoxenus for the betrayal for the sake of the city of Scione, lest the Scionaeans be thought to be always traitors in the time to come.
The betrayal of Timoxenus was indeed exposed in such a manner. And to Artabazus, when he had been besieging Potidaea for three months, there occurred a great low tide of the sea, lasting for a long time. Seeing the land exposed, the barbarians crossed over to Pallene. And when they had traversed two-fifths of the distance, with three-fifths still remaining, a great flood tide of the sea came upon them, such as had never happened before, as the locals say. Those who did not know how to swim perished, while the Potidaeans, sailing up in boats, destroyed those who did know how to swim. The Potidaeans say that the cause of the shallow water, the flood tide, and the Persian disaster was this: that these Persians had committed sacrilege against the temple and the statue of Poseidon, which was in the suburb. And in saying this, they seem to me to speak well. Artabazus led the survivors to Thessaly, to join Mardonius. These were the men who had escorted the king and thus met their fate.
The naval force of Xerxes, having escaped to Asia from Salamis and having ferried the king and the army from the Chersonese to Abydos, wintered in Cyme. But when spring dawned, it gathered early at Samos, where some of the ships had also wintered: and the majority of those on board were Persians and Medes. The commanders who came to them were Mardontes, son of Bagaeus, and Artayntes, son of Artachaees; and Ithamitres, the nephew of Artayntes, joined them. Having been greatly defeated, they did not advance further westward, nor did anyone force them, but they sat in Samos, guarding Ionia lest it revolt, having three hundred ships together with the Ionian ones. They did not even expect the Greeks to come to Ionia, but to be content with guarding their own land, since they had not pursued them when they fled from Salamis but were glad to be rid of them. So, they were downhearted about the sea, but they thought that Mardonius would greatly prevail on land. And being in Samos, they both planned if they could do any harm to their enemies and also listened to where Mardonius' affairs would fall.
As the spring came and Mardonius was in Thessaly, the Greeks were stirred up to act. Indeed, the infantry had not yet been gathered, but the naval force arrived in Aegina, numbering one hundred and ten ships. The general and admiral was Leutychides, son of Menares, of Hagesilaus, of Hippocratides, of Leutychides, of Anaxilaus, of Archidamus, of Anaxandrides, of Theopompus, of Nicander, of Charilaus, of Eunomus, of Polydectes, of Prytanis, of Euryphon, of Procles, of Aristodemus, of Aristomachus, of Cleodaeus, of Hyllus, of Heracles, being of the other house of the kings. All these, except for the first seven listed after Leutychides, the others became kings of Sparta. And the Athenian general was Xanthippus, son of Ariphron.
When all the ships had assembled in Aegina, messengers from the Ionians came to the Greek camp. These messengers had earlier gone to Sparta to ask the Lacedaemonians to liberate Ionia. One of them was Herodotus, son of Basileides. At first, there were seven of them who had conspired to kill Strattis, the tyrant of Chios. However, when their plot was revealed, the remaining six secretly left Chios, went to Sparta, and now arrived in Aegina, urging the Greeks to sail to Ionia. The Greeks agreed to take them as far as Delos, but they were hesitant because they were unfamiliar with the area and feared armed forces were everywhere. They also believed that Samos was as far away as the Pillars of Heracles. As a result, the barbarians were too discouraged to sail further west than Samos, while the Greeks, due to the Chians' request, dared not go further east than Delos. Fear kept a considerable distance between the two sides.
The Greeks indeed sailed to Delos, while Mardonius wintered around Thessaly. From there, setting out, he sent a man of European descent, whose name was Mys, instructing him to go everywhere and consult the oracles, of which they could attempt to learn. What he wanted to find out from these oracles, I cannot say, for it is not told; but I think that he sent him concerning the present matters and not about other things.
This Mys appears to have arrived at Lebadea and, by means of payment, persuaded a local man to descend to Trophonius; and arriving at Abae of Phocis, he went to the oracle. And indeed, when he first arrived at Thebes, he consulted the Ismenian Apollo through sacrifice, just as it is done at the Olympic sanctuaries. There, he persuaded a foreigner, not a Theban, with money to sleep in the shrine of Amphiaraus. No Theban is allowed to seek prophecy there for this reason: Amphiaraus, through an oracle, commanded them to choose which of these they wanted, either to use him as a prophet or as an ally, abstaining from the other. They chose him to be an ally. For this reason, no Theban is allowed to sleep there.
At that time, the greatest wonder is said to have occurred among the Thebans: the European Mys, having gone around all the oracles, came to the sanctuary of Ptoan Apollo. This temple is called Ptoum, and it belongs to the Thebans; it lies above Lake Copais, near the mountain closest to the city of Acraephia. When this Mys, who is called such, came to this temple, three chosen men from the citizens followed him from the assembly, as they were about to record the prophecies, and he used the foreign language of the diviner. And the Theban followers were amazed, listening to a foreign language instead of Greek, and they did not have any use for the present matter: but the European Mys snatched the tablet they were carrying from them, and he wrote on it the words spoken by the prophet, and he said that he used the Carian language, and having written it down, he went away, departing to Thessaly.
Mardonius then, having considered the messages from the oracles, afterwards sent a messenger to Athens, Alexander the son of Amyntas, a Macedonian man, both because the Persians were related to him: for Alexander's sister Gygaea, and Amyntas' daughter, Bubares, a Persian man, had, from whom had been born to him Amyntas in Asia, having the name of his mother's father, to whom indeed from the king of Phrygia was given the great city Alabanda to rule: and at the same time Mardonius, learning that Alexander would be both a supporter and a benefactor, sent him: for he thought that he would most likely win over the Athenians, hearing that they were indeed a large and brave people, and knowing that the Athenians had especially accomplished the sufferings that had befallen them at sea. And with these things happening, he hoped to easily rule the sea, which indeed would be true, and he thought that he was much stronger on land, and thus he calculated that the affairs would be under him concerning the Greeks. And perhaps the oracles would also tell him these things, advising to make the Athenian an ally: and so, being persuaded, he sent.
This Alexander's seventh ancestor is Perdiccas, who gained the tyranny of the Macedonians in such a manner. From Argos, three brothers of the descendants of Temenus fled to the Illyrians, Gauanes and Aeropus and Perdiccas, and from the Illyrians, crossing over, they arrived in the upper Macedonia at the city of Lebaea. There they served for wages with the king, one tending horses, another oxen, and the youngest of them, Perdiccas, the small animals. The king's wife herself baked their bread; for the tyrannies of men were weak in wealth even long ago, not only the people. However, the bread of the servant boy Perdiccas became double its own size when baked. And when this always happened, she spoke to her husband; and he, having heard, immediately went in as if it were a portent and brought great significance. And calling the servants, he ordered them to depart from his land. But they said it was just to receive their wages and then to go away. At this point, the king, having heard about the wages, for the sun was entering the house through the smoke vent, said, becoming god-fearing, "I give you this worthy wage of yours," receiving the sun. Indeed, Gauanes and Aeropus, the elder ones, stood astonished when they heard this; but the boy, for he happened to have a knife, said these words, "We accept, O king, what you give," and he traced around the sun on the floor of the house with the knife, and having traced around it, he gathered the sun into his lap three times and departed, both he and those with him.
The brothers indeed went away, but someone of those sitting nearby signified to the king what sort of thing the boy would do and how the youngest would receive the gifts with understanding. And he, having heard these things and becoming angry, sent horsemen to kill them. And there is a river in this land, to which the descendants of these men from Argos sacrifice for salvation: this river, after the sons of Temenus crossed it, flowed so greatly that the horsemen were not able to cross. And they, having arrived in another land of Macedonia, settled near the gardens said to be of Midas, son of Gordias, in which roses grow by themselves, each having sixty leaves and surpassing in fragrance the other roses. In these gardens, Silenus was captured, as it is said by the Macedonians. And above the gardens lies a mountain named Bermius, impassable due to winter. Setting out from there, as they held this land, they also subdued the rest of Macedonia.
From this Perdiccas indeed, Alexander was thus born: Alexander was the son of Amyntas, and Amyntas was the son of Alcetes, and the father of Alcetes was Aeropus, and of him was Philippus, and of Philippus was Argaeus, and of him was Perdiccas who gained the rule.
Alexander, son of Amyntas, was indeed born thus. When he arrived in Athens, sent by Mardonius, he said these things: "Men of Athens, Mardonius says this: 'A message has come to me from the king saying thus: 'I forgive the Athenians for all the offenses committed against me. Now, Mardonius, do this: give them back their land, and let them choose another land for themselves, whichever they desire, being autonomous; and restore all their temples, if indeed they are willing to make an agreement with me.' Since these things have been commanded, it is necessary for me to do them, unless your actions become the cause. I say these things to you: why now do you act madly, always taking up war against the king? For you would not be able to surpass him, nor are you able to resist for all time. For you have seen the multitude of Xerxes' army and its deeds, and you learn about the power that is now with me; so that even if you surpass us and are victorious, of which there is no hope for you if you think rightly, another force many times greater will be present. Therefore, do not wish, by becoming equal to the king, to be deprived of your land and to always be in danger concerning yourselves, but make peace: it is most beautiful for you to make peace, with the king attacking here. Be free, making an agreement with us without deceit and without trickery.' Mardonius indeed, O Athenians, commanded me to say these things to you: I, however, will say nothing about the goodwill that exists towards you from me, for you would not learn it now for the first time, but I need your persuasion for Mardonius. For I see that you are not able to wage war against Xerxes for all time: if I saw this in you, I would never have come to you with these words; for the king's power is beyond human and his hand is very long. Therefore, if you do not immediately agree, stretching out greatly upon those things which they wish to agree upon, I fear for you, living in the very path, above all the allies, always being destroyed alone, and possessing an exceptional and contested land. But be persuaded: for these things are worth much to you, if indeed the great king, forgiving only you Greeks your offenses, wishes to become your friend.'"
Alexander spoke these things. But the Lacedaemonians, having learned that Alexander came to Athens to bring them into agreement with the barbarian, and remembering the oracles that it was their destiny to be driven out of the Peloponnese by the Medes and Athenians along with the other Dorians, greatly feared that the Athenians might make an agreement with the Persian. And so, they immediately decided to send messengers. Indeed, it happened that their arrival coincided: for the Athenians had been delaying, well knowing that the Lacedaemonians were about to learn of the arrival of the messenger from the barbarian concerning the agreement, and expecting them to send messengers quickly. Therefore, they purposely made a show, revealing their intentions to the Lacedaemonians.
But when Alexander ceased speaking, the envoys from Sparta took up the word and said, "The Lacedaemonians have sent us to beseech you neither to innovate anything in Greece nor to accept the words from the barbarian. For neither is it just in any way, nor does it bring honor, nor to any other Greeks anywhere, but especially to you, for many reasons. For you raised this war, not wanting anything from us, and the struggle was first about your rule, but now it concerns all of Greece. In no way is it tolerable for the Athenians to become the cause of slavery for all Greeks, who have always been seen as liberators of many people. However, we sympathize with you, as you have been deprived of your crops twice already and have suffered destruction for a long time. In return for this, the Lacedaemonians and their allies promise to support your women and all the useless household members in war, as long as this war stands. Do not let Alexander the Macedonian read you, pitying Mardonius' words. For this man must do these things: being a tyrant, he cooperates with a tyrant. But you must not do it if you happen to think well, knowing that there is nothing trustworthy or true for the barbarians." These things the envoys said.
The Athenians, in response to Alexander, said this: "We ourselves know that the power of the Mede is much greater than ours, so there is no need to reproach us with this. Yet, desiring freedom, we will defend ourselves in whatever way we can. Do not try to persuade us to agree with the barbarian, nor will we be persuaded. Now, report to Mardonius that the Athenians say, as long as the sun goes the same way as it does now, we will never agree with Xerxes. Instead, we will trust in the gods and heroes as our allies, defending against him, who, having no regard for them, burned down their houses and their statues. And you, for the rest, do not appear to the Athenians with such words, nor, thinking to do good, advise us to do impious deeds. For we do not wish you, being our friend and protector, to suffer anything unpleasant from the Athenians."
To Alexander, they responded thus, and to the envoys from Sparta, they said the following: "Indeed, it is very human for the Lacedaemonians to fear that we might make an agreement with the barbarian. However, you have come here with a shameful lack of understanding of the Athenians' spirit, thinking that there is so much gold on earth or a land so surpassingly beautiful and excellent that we would be willing to accept it in exchange for enslaving Greece by siding with the Medes. For there are many and great reasons why we would not do this, even if we wanted to: first and foremost, the statues and temples of the gods, which have been burned and destroyed, for which we are bound to seek the greatest vengeance rather than make an agreement with the one who committed these acts. Furthermore, being Greek, sharing the same blood and language, and having common religious practices and customs, it would not be well for the Athenians to become traitors. So, know this, if you did not happen to know it before: as long as even one Athenian remains, we will never make an agreement with Xerxes. However, we appreciate your concern for us, as you foresaw our homes being destroyed and were willing to take care of our families. Your gratitude is complete, but we will persevere as best we can, without causing you any trouble. Now, as things stand, send out an army as quickly as possible. For, as we suspect, it will not be long before the barbarian invades our land, as soon as he learns the news that we will not do what he wanted from us. Therefore, before he arrives in Attica, it is time for us to advance into Boeotia." Having received this response from the Athenians, the envoys departed for Sparta.