93. These things were being said, but the majority of the allies did not accept the words. Now, the others remained silent, but a Corinthian, Socles, spoke these things: "Indeed, the sky will be below the earth and the earth will be suspended above the sky, and men will have their dwelling in the sea and fish will have theirs on the land, when you, Lacedaemonians, prepare to bring down tyrannies, destroying equal powers in the cities, of which there is nothing more unjust nor more murderous among men. For if indeed this seems good to you, that the cities be ruled by tyrants, first establish a tyrant among yourselves, and then seek to establish them for the others. But now, being inexperienced in tyranny yourselves, and guarding most fiercely against this happening in Sparta, you are treating your allies unfairly. If you were experienced in it, as we are, you would have better opinions to contribute than you do now."
94. For the Corinthians, the state of their city was as follows: there was an oligarchy, and these men, called the Bacchiadae, ruled the city, marrying and leading from among themselves. Now, to these men, Amphion had a lame daughter: her name was Labda. Since none of the Bacchiadae wanted to marry her, Eetion, son of Echecrates, took her, being from the common people of Petra, but tracing his lineage back to Lapithes and Caeneus. From this woman, and not from any other, children were born to him. So he was sent to Delphi concerning offspring. As he entered, the Pythian priestess immediately addressed him with these verses: "Eetion, no one honors you, though you are very worthy. Labda is pregnant, and she will give birth to a wheel of destruction, which will fall upon the ruling men and will bring justice to Corinth." These things, having been prophesied to Eetion, were somehow reported to the Bacchiadae, for whom the earlier oracle sent to Corinth was unknown, which brought the same message as Eetion's and said this: "An eagle in the rocks is pregnant, and she will give birth to a strong, devouring lion, which will loosen the knees of many. Consider these things well, Corinthians, you who dwell around beautiful Peirene and lofty Corinth." This oracle, having been given to the Bacchiadae earlier, was unclear; but when they learned of the one given to Eetion, they immediately understood that it was in harmony with Eetion's. Having understood this, they kept quiet, wanting to destroy the offspring that was to be born to Eetion. As soon as the woman gave birth, they sent ten of their own men to the village where Eetion lived to kill the child. These men, arriving at Petra and going into Eetion's courtyard, asked for the child. Labda, knowing nothing of the reason for their arrival, and thinking they were asking for the child out of affection for its father, brought and handed it to one of them. Now, it had been planned that the first of them to receive the child would dash it to the ground. So when Labda brought it, the child smiled at the man who took it, and some pity held him back from killing it; feeling compassion, he handed it to the second man, and he to the third. In this way, it was passed through all ten, with none of them wanting to carry out the deed. So they handed the child back to its mother and went outside, standing at the doors and accusing one another, especially the first man who took the child, for not doing what had been decided. As time went on, they decided to go back in and all share in the murder. But it was necessary for evil to spring up from Eetion's offspring for Corinth. For Labda, hearing all these things while standing near the doors, was afraid that they would change their minds and, taking the child a second time, would kill it. So she brought it and hid it in the place that seemed to her the most unnoticeable, in a chest, knowing that if they returned to search, they would thoroughly investigate everything. And indeed, this happened. They came and searched, but as it did not appear to them, they thought it best to leave and say to those who sent them that they had done everything they had been instructed to do. And so they said these things.
95. After this, Eetion's son grew up, and having escaped this danger from the chest, he was named Cypselus. When he became a man and consulted an oracle, he received a double-meaning prophecy at Delphi, which he trusted and seized Corinth. The oracle was as follows: "Blessed is the man who enters my house, Cypselus, son of Eetion, king of famous Corinth, he and his sons, but no longer his sons' sons." This was the prophecy, and when Cypselus became a tyrant, he was such a man: he exiled many Corinthians, deprived many of their wealth, and took the lives of many more. After ruling for thirty years and living a good life, his son Periander succeeded him as the tyrant. Now, Periander was initially gentler than his father, but after corresponding with Thrasybulus, the tyrant of Miletus, he became much more bloodthirsty than Cypselus. For he sent a messenger to Thrasybulus to inquire how he could best and most securely govern the city. Thrasybulus led the messenger who came from Periander outside the city, and as he walked through a field of wheat, he asked questions while cutting off the tallest ears of wheat and throwing them away, until he had destroyed the best and tallest part of the crop in this manner. Then he went through the field and said nothing, sending the messenger back. When the messenger returned to Corinth, Periander was eager to learn the advice, but the messenger said that Thrasybulus had given no advice and was amazed that Periander would send him to such a man, who was clearly mad and had ruined his own affairs. Periander, understanding what had been done and realizing that Thrasybulus was advising him to kill the most prominent citizens, then displayed every kind of wickedness towards the people. For whatever Cypselus had left undone in killing and driving out, Periander completed, and in one day he stripped all the women of Corinth naked because of his wife Melissa. For when he sent messengers to the Thesprotians at the Acheron River to consult the oracle of the dead about a deposit of a foreign friend, Melissa's ghost, appearing, said that she would neither reveal nor conceal the deposit in the place where it was hidden, for she was cold and naked, for the clothes with which he had buried her were of no use, not having been burnt. As proof that she was telling the truth, she said that Periander had put bread on a cold oven. When this was reported back to Periander, he immediately made a proclamation after the message that all the women of Corinth should go to the temple of Hera. The women, thinking it was a festival, went dressed in their finest clothes, but Periander, having stationed his bodyguards, stripped them all alike, both the free women and the slaves, and having gathered them together in a pit, he prayed to Melissa and burned them. Having done this and sent a second message, the ghost of Melissa revealed the hidden deposit of the foreign friend. Such is tyranny, O Lacedaemonians, and such are its deeds. But we Corinthians were greatly amazed when we saw you sending for Hippias, and now we are even more amazed at your words, and we bear witness, calling upon the gods of the Greeks, not to establish tyrannies in the cities. Will you not cease but try to bring Hippias back contrary to justice? Know that you will not have the consent of the Corinthians.
