93. Socles, indeed, from Corinth as an ambassador, spoke these things, and Hippias answered him, invoking the same gods as he did, that indeed the Corinthians most of all would long for the Pisistratidae when the days come for them to be troubled by the Athenians. Hippias, indeed, answered these things, understanding the oracles most accurately of men. The rest of the allies, however, held themselves in silence until now, but when they heard Socles speaking freely, each one of them, breaking their silence, chose the opinion of the Corinthian, and they bore witness to the Lacedaemonians not to do anything new concerning a Greek city.
94. Thus, indeed, this was stopped. But then, as Hippias was being driven away, Amyntas, the king of the Macedonians, offered him Anthemus, and the Thessalians offered Iolcus. He, however, chose neither of these, but retreated back to Sigeum, which Pisistratus had taken by force from the Mytilenaeans, and having gained control of it, he established his illegitimate son Hegesistratus as a tyrant there, who was born from an Argive woman, and who did not hold what he received from Pisistratus without fighting. For the Mytilenaeans and the Athenians waged war for a long time, both attacking from the city of Achilleum and from Sigeum; the Mytilenaeans demanded the land, while the Athenians neither acknowledged nor demonstrated by argument that the Aeolians had any more share in the land of Ilium than they themselves and the other Greeks, as many as had joined Menelaus in avenging the abduction of Helen.
95. During their war, various things happened in the battles, and indeed, in one of them, the poet Alcaeus, when the Athenians were winning and an engagement occurred, he himself fled and escaped, but the Athenians held his weapons, and they hung them up in the Athenian temple in Sigeum. Alcaeus, having composed a song about these things, added it to Mytilene, announcing his own misfortune to a friend named Melanippus. Periander, the son of Cypselus, reconciled the Mytilenaeans and the Athenians; for they turned to him as an arbitrator, and he reconciled them in this way: each side was to possess what they had.
96. Sigeum, then, now came under the control of the Athenians. And Hippias, after arriving from Lacedaemon to Asia, stirred up every matter, slandering the Athenians to Artaphrenes and doing everything so that Athens might become subject to both himself and Darius. Indeed, Hippias was pressing these matters, and the Athenians, learning of this, sent messengers to Sardis, not allowing the Persians to be persuaded by the exiled Athenians. But Artaphrenes commanded them, if they wished to be safe, to receive Hippias back. The Athenians, however, did not accept the words being brought back, and since they did not accept them, it seemed right to them to be openly at war with the Persians.
97. But they think these things and are slandered to the Persians, and at this time indeed, the Milesian Aristagoras, having been expelled by Cleomenes the Lacedaemonian from Sparta, arrived in Athens: for this city of the remaining ones had the greatest power. And Aristagoras, having come to the people, spoke the same things as in Sparta concerning the good things in Asia and the Persian war, as they neither consider a shield nor a spear and would be easy to be handled. And indeed he spoke these things and in addition to them, as the Milesians are colonists of the Athenians, and it would be their duty to save them with great power: and there was nothing he did not promise as he was in great need, to which he persuaded them. For he thought it was much easier to deceive many than one, if indeed he was not able to deceive Cleomenes the Lacedaemonian alone, but he made thirty thousand Athenians do this. The Athenians then, having been persuaded, voted to send twenty ships to help the Ionians, having chosen Melanthius, a man of the citizens being altogether respectable, to be their admiral: and these ships became the beginning of evils for both Greeks and foreigners.
98. Aristagoras, having sailed forth and arrived in Miletus, found a plan from which no help was going to come to the Ionians, but he did it so that he might annoy King Darius. He sent a man to Phrygia to the Paeonians who had been made captives from the river Strymon by Megabazus and were dwelling in a part of Phrygia and a village of their own. When he arrived at the Paeonians, he said these things: "Men of Paeonia, Aristagoras, the tyrant of Miletus, sent me to offer you salvation, if you are willing to be persuaded. For now, all Ionia has revolted from the king, and it is possible for you to be saved by going to your own land; as far as the sea, we will provide for you, and from there on, it will be our concern." Hearing these things, the Paeonians were very glad and, taking their children and wives, they fled to the sea, while some of them remained behind out of fear. And when the Paeonians arrived at the sea, they crossed over to Chios. Already in Chios, a large force of Persian horsemen had come pursuing the Paeonians. But since they did not catch them, they sent a message to the Paeonians in Chios that they should return. The Paeonians, however, did not accept the words, but the Chians took them from Chios to Lesbos, and the Lesbians took them to Doriscus. From there, being conveyed by land, they arrived in Paeonia.
99. Aristagoras, when the Athenians arrived with their twenty ships, along with five triremes of the Eretrians, who were not waging war for the sake of the Athenians but for their own, repaying the debt owed to the Milesians: for indeed, the Milesians had previously helped the Eretrians in the war against the Chalcidians, at the time when the Samians were also helping the Chalcidians against the Eretrians and Milesians. So when these forces arrived and the other allies were present, Aristagoras made an expedition against Sardis. He himself, however, did not wage war but stayed in Miletus, and he appointed other generals to be of the Milesians, his own brother Charopinus and another citizen Hermophantus.
100. Arriving with this fleet, the Ionians came to Ephesus and left their ships at Coresus of the Ephesian territory, while they themselves went up with a large force, making the Ephesians leaders of the way. As they went along the Caicus River, and then crossed the Tmolus, they arrived and captured Sardis without anyone opposing them, capturing everything except the citadel: for Artaphrenes himself was defending the citadel, having a not insignificant force of men.
101. The reason they did not plunder the city after capturing it was this: there were houses in Sardis, most of which were made of reeds, and even those made of bricks had roofs of reeds. One of the soldiers set fire to one of these houses, and the fire immediately spread from house to house, engulfing the entire city. As the city burned, the Lydians and the Persians who were in the city, trapped on all sides by the fire that reached the outermost parts, and having no way out of the city, gathered in the marketplace and near the Pactolus River, which, carrying gold dust from Mount Tmolus, flowed through the middle of the marketplace and then emptied into the Hermus River, which in turn flowed into the sea. The Lydians and the Persians, gathering in the marketplace and near the Pactolus River, were forced to defend themselves. The Ionians, seeing some of the enemies defending themselves and a large number of others approaching, became afraid and retreated towards the mountain called Tmolus; from there, under the cover of night, they withdrew to their ships.
102. And Sardis was indeed set on fire, and within it, a temple of the local goddess Cybebe: the Persians, later using this as a pretext, set fire to the temples in Hellas. At that time, the Persians who held provinces within the Halys River, having learned of these events, gathered and came to the aid of the Lydians. And indeed, they found the Ionians no longer in Sardis, but following their tracks, they caught them in Ephesus. And the Ionians were arrayed against them, but engaging in battle, they were greatly defeated. And the Persians killed many of them, including other famous men, and indeed Eualcides, the general of the Eretrians, who had won crowns in the games and had been greatly praised by Simonides of Ceos. And those of them who escaped the battle were scattered throughout their cities.
103. Then indeed in this way they fought. But after, the Athenians, having completely left the Ionians, although Aristagoras called upon them many times through messengers, they did not say they would avenge them: the Ionians, having been deprived of the alliance of the Athenians, for thus it had been done to them with respect to Darius, no less prepared for the war against the king. And having sailed to the Hellespont, they made Byzantium and all the other cities in this region their own, and having sailed out from the Hellespont, they acquired for themselves the greater part of Caria to be their ally: for even Caunus, not wanting to be an ally earlier, when they had set fire to Sardis, then also joined them.
104. The Cyprians indeed willingly joined them all, except for the Amathusians: for they too revolted from the Medes in this way. Onesilus was the younger brother of Gorgus, the king of the Salaminians, and the son of Chersis, the son of Siromus, the son of Evelthon. This man had often before urged Gorgus to revolt from the king, but then, when he learned that the Ionians had revolted, he pressed him even more. But when he did not persuade Gorgus, Onesilus, having watched him go out of the city of the Salaminians, together with his own partisans, shut him out of the gates. Gorgus indeed, having been deprived of the city, fled to the Medes, but Onesilus ruled as king of Salamis and persuaded all the Cyprians to revolt together. He indeed persuaded the others, but the Amathusians, not wanting to be persuaded, he besieged, having settled down against them.
105. Onesilus, indeed, was besieging Amathus. But when it was reported to King Darius that Sardis had been captured and set on fire by the Athenians and Ionians, and that Aristagoras the Milesian had become the leader of the gathering so that these things were woven together, it is said that he, when he learned these things, made no account of the Ionians, knowing well that they would not escape punishment for their rebellion. He asked, however, who the Athenians were. And after learning, he asked for his bow, and taking it and fitting an arrow on it, he shot it upwards towards the sky, and as he shot it into the air, he said, "O Zeus, grant me to take vengeance on the Athenians." And having said this, he ordered one of his servants, when dinner was set before him, to say to him three times at each meal, "Master, remember the Athenians."
106. After giving this order, Darius called Histiaeus, the Milesian who had been with him for a long time, and said, "Histiaeus, I have learned that your deputy, whom you appointed in Miletus, has done new things against me: for he has brought men from the other continent, and with them Ionians who will give me satisfaction for what they have done, and having persuaded these to join him, he has deprived me of Sardis. Now then, how does it seem to you that this is well done? And how could anything of this kind have been done without your counsel? Take care lest you find yourself in trouble later." To this Histiaeus said, "O king, what kind of word have you spoken, that I would plan anything which would bring harm to you, either great or small? What could I be seeking to gain by doing this, being in need of nothing myself, and having all things which belong to you, and being thought worthy to hear all your counsels? But if my deputy is indeed doing such a thing as you say, know that he has done it for his own sake. However, I do not even accept the report that the Milesians and my deputy are doing anything new concerning your affairs. But if they are indeed doing something of this kind and you have heard the truth, O king, learn what a thing you have done by making me, who was living by the sea, to be drawn up from it. For the Ionians, when I was out of their sight, did that which they had long desired to do; and if I had been in Ionia, not one city would have stirred. Now then, as quickly as possible, let me go to Ionia, so that I may set all these things in order for you and deliver into your hands this deputy of Miletus who has devised these things. And having done this according to your mind, I swear by the gods of the royal house that I will not take off the tunic which I have on until I make Sardo, the largest of the islands, a tributary to you."
107. Histiaeus, indeed, saying these things, deceived Darius, and Darius was persuaded and let him go, having instructed him that, after he had accomplished the things he had promised, he should return to Susa.
108. While the message concerning Sardis was going to the king, and Darius having done the things about the bow allowed Histiaeus to go to the sea, during this whole time these things happened. Onesilus of Salamis, besieging the Amathusians, was informed that a large Persian force led by Artybius, a Persian man, was expected to be in Cyprus. Hearing this, Onesilus sent heralds to Ionia, calling upon them, and the Ionians, not deliberating for long, came with a large fleet. Indeed, the Ionians were present in Cyprus, and the Persians, crossing by ships from Cilicia, were going towards Salamis by land. And the Phoenicians were sailing around the headland called the Keys of Cyprus with their ships.
109. As this was happening, the tyrants of Cyprus, having summoned the generals of the Ionians, said, "Men of Ionia, we, the Cypriots, give you a choice of whom you wish to face, either the Persians or the Phoenicians. For if you desire to face the Persians on land, it would be time for you to disembark from your ships and arrange yourselves on foot, while we board your ships to oppose the Phoenicians. But if you would rather face the Phoenicians, it is necessary for you to do whichever of these you choose, so that both Ionia and Cyprus will be free." The Ionians responded to this, "The common council of the Ionians sent us to guard the sea, not to hand over our ships to the Cypriots and ourselves face the Persians on foot. Now, we will attempt to be useful in the way we were assigned. It is necessary for you, remembering the kind of suffering you endured while enslaved to the Medes, to become brave men."
110. The Ionians answered them thus, and after the Persians had come to the plain of Salamis, the kings of the Cypriots arranged their forces, positioning the other Cypriots against the other soldiers, and having chosen the best of the Salaminians and Solians, they set them against the Persians. Onesilus, willingly, took his position opposite Artybius, the general of the Persians.
111. Artybius rode a horse trained to stand upright against an infantryman. When Onesilus learned this, he spoke to his attendant, a brave Carian man who was highly esteemed in war and otherwise full of courage, and said to him, "I hear that Artybius' horse stands upright and works with its feet and mouth against whoever it is brought near. So, you decide and tell me at once which one you want to guard against and strike, either the horse or Artybius himself." His attendant replied to this, "O King, I am ready to do both or either of them, and certainly whatever you command. However, as it seems to me to be more suitable for your affairs, I will tell you. I say it is necessary for a king and general to face a king and general. For if you bring down a man who is a general, it is a great thing for you, and secondly, if he, may it not happen, brings you down, it is half a misfortune to die by a worthy hand. But for us, the attendants, it is appropriate to face other attendants and the horse. Do not fear its tricks; for I assure you that it will not stand against any man any longer."
112. He said these things, and immediately the armies mixed in battle on foot and by ships. Now indeed, the Ionians, becoming the best on that day, surpassed the Phoenicians in their ships, and of these, the Samians were the most excellent. On foot, however, as the armies came together, they fought in close combat. And concerning both generals, these things happened: as Artybius approached Onesilus, sitting on his horse, Onesilus, according to what he had agreed with his attendant, struck Artybius as he came near. And when the horse threw its legs upon the shield of Onesilus, at that moment, the Carian, striking with a curved sword, cut off the legs of the horse.
113. Thus indeed, Artybius, the general of the Persians, fell together with his horse in this manner. And as the others were fighting, Stesenor, being the ruler of Curium, betrayed with a not small force of men around himself. And these Curians are said to be colonists of the Argives. And as the Curians betrayed, immediately also the war-chariots of the Salaminians did the same as the Curians. And as these things were happening, the Persians were superior to the Cyprians. And as the army was defeated, many others fell, and indeed also Onesilus, the son of Chersis, who had brought about the rebellion of the Cyprians, and the king of the Solians, Aristocyprus, the son of Philocyprus. And this Philocyprus was the one whom Solon, the Athenian, arriving in Cyprus, praised in verses, especially among rulers.
114. Now indeed, the Amathusians, because Onesilus had besieged them, having cut off his head, carried it to Amathus and hung it above the gates. And as the head was hanging and already being hollow, a swarm of bees entered it and filled it with honeycomb. And when such a thing happened, for the Amathusians were concerned about it, it was divined for them to bury the head having taken it down, and to sacrifice to Onesilus as to a hero every year, and by doing these things, it would be better for them to live together.
115. The Amathusians indeed now did these things and continued until my time: The Ionians, however, who fought the naval battle in Cyprus, after they learned that the affairs of Onesilus had been ruined and the other cities of the Cypriots were besieged, except for Salamis, which was handed over to Gorgus, the former king, by the Salaminians, immediately upon learning these things, the Ionians sailed away to Ionia. Of the cities in Cyprus, Soli held out the longest time besieged, and the Persians captured it in the fifth month by digging a tunnel around the wall.
116. The Cyprians, indeed having become free for a year, were once again enslaved. Daurises, both Hymaees and Otanes, other Persian generals, having daughters of Darius, pursuing the Ionians who had campaigned to Sardis and having driven them into their ships, as they prevailed in the battle, then dividing the cities among themselves, they laid waste.
117. Daurises, turning towards the cities in the Hellespont, captured Dardanus, and captured Abydus, and Percote, and Lampsacus, and Paesus. He captured these each on a single day, and from Paesus, as he was driving towards the city of Parium, a message came that the Carians, having the same thought as the Ionians, had revolted from the Persians. So, turning away from the Hellespont, he led his army towards Caria.
118. And somehow this news reached the Carians before Daurises arrived: and upon hearing it, the Carians gathered at the so-called White Pillars and the Marsyas River, which flows from the Idria region into the Maeander River. And when the Carians had gathered there, many other plans were discussed, and the one that seemed best to me was that of Pixodarus, the son of Mausolus, a man from Cindya, who had the daughter of Syennesis, the king of Cilicia, as his wife. This man's plan was for the Carians to cross the Maeander River and fight with the river at their back, so that the Carians, having no way to retreat, would be forced to stand their ground and become even braver than their nature. However, this plan did not prevail, but rather the decision was made for the Persians to have the Maeander River at their back, rather than the Carians themselves, meaning that if the Persians were to flee and be defeated in battle, they would not be able to escape by falling back into the river.
119. After the Persians arrived and crossed the Maeander River, the Carians met them at the Marsyas River and fought a strong and lengthy battle. In the end, they were defeated due to the multitude of Persians. Indeed, two thousand Persians fell, and ten thousand Carians. Then, the survivors among them were driven to Labraunda, to the sanctuary of Zeus of Armies, a large and sacred grove of plane trees. The Carians alone, of those we know, offer sacrifices to Zeus of Armies. So, having been driven there, they deliberated about their salvation, whether it would be better to surrender themselves to the Persians or to abandon Asia altogether.
120. While they were deliberating these matters, the Milesians and their allies came to their aid. At this point, the Carians abandoned their previous plans and began to prepare for war anew. And when they engaged with the Persians, they were defeated even more than before. Of all those who fell, the Milesians were struck the most severely.
121. After this wound, the Carians both recovered and fought again: for learning that the Persians were preparing to march upon their cities, they ambushed the road at Pedasus, into which falling, the Persians were destroyed by night, both themselves and their generals Daurises, Amorges, and Sisimaces; and with them also died Myrsus, the son of Gyges. The leader of this ambush was Heraclides, the son of Ibanollis, a man of Mylasa.
122. These Persians indeed thus perished: Hymaees, however, himself being one of those who pursued the Ionians that had marched to Sardis, turning to the Propontis, captured Cius in Mysia. Having taken this, as he learned that Daurises had left the Hellespont and was marching upon Caria, leaving the Propontis, he led his army to the Hellespont, and he captured all the Aeolians who inhabit the Ilium region, and he captured the Gergithae, who were left behind of the ancient Teucrians. Hymaees himself, while capturing these nations, met his end by disease in the Troad.
123. This man indeed thus met his end, and Artaphrenes, the governor of Sardis, and Otanes, the third general, were appointed to lead the army against Ionia and the neighboring Aeolian region. Now, in Ionia, they captured Clazomenae, and in Aeolia, they captured Cyme.
124. As the cities were being captured, it was clear that Aristagoras of Miletus was not a man of great courage, who had stirred up Ionia and involved himself in great affairs, and now he was devising a plan of escape, seeing these things. And it seemed to him impossible to overcome King Darius. Therefore, he called together his fellow conspirators and consulted with them, saying that it would be better for them to have some place of refuge ready, if indeed they were driven out of Miletus, whether they should go from this place to a colony in Sardo, or to Myrcinus of the Edonians, which Histiaeus had fortified, having received it as a gift from Darius. Aristagoras asked these things.
125. Now, the opinion of Hecataeus, the son of Hegesander, a man of words, did not favor sending to either of these places, but rather, having built a stronghold on the island of Leros, to live in peace, if he should be driven out of Miletus; and then, setting out from there, to attempt to return to Miletus.
126. Hecataeus indeed advised these things, but for Aristagoras himself, the strongest opinion was to lead (them) to Myrcinus. He indeed entrusted Miletus to Pythagoras, a man esteemed among the citizens, and he himself, taking along everyone who wanted (to join), sailed to Thrace, and he took possession of the land for which he was sent. Setting out from there, Aristagoras himself and his army were destroyed by the Thracians, besieging a city and (while) the Thracians were willing to leave under a truce.
